GOLEM XIV



FOREWORD BY IRVING T. CREVE, M.A., PH.D.



INTRODUCTION BY THOMAS B. FULLER II, GENERAL, U.S. ARMY, RET.



AFTERWORD BY RICHARD POPP



INDIANA UNIVERSITY PRESS



2047



Foreword



To pinpoint the moment in history when the abacus acquired reason is as difficult as saying exactly
when the ape turned into man. And yet barely one human life span has lapsed since the moment
when, with the construction of Vannevar Bush's differential-equation analyzer, intellectronics began
its turbulent development, eniac, which followed toward the close of World War II, was the machine
that gave rise￢ﾀﾔ prematurely, of course￢ﾀﾔto the name"electronic brain." eniac was in fact a
computer and, when measured on the tree of life, a primitive nerve ganglion. Yet historians date the
age of computerization from it. In the 1950s a considerable demand for calculating machines
developed. One of the first concerns to put them into mass production was IBM.



Those devices had little in common with the processes of thought. They were used as data processors
in the field of economics and by big business, as well as in administration and science. They also
entered politics: the earliest were used to predict the results of Presidential elections. At more or
less the same time the RAND Corporation began to interest military circles at the Pentagon in a
method of predicting occurrences in the international politico-military arena, a method relying on
the formulation of so-called "scenarios of events." From there it was only a short distance to more
versatile techniques like the CIMA, from which the applied algebra of events that is termed (not too
felicitously) politicomatics arose two decades later. The computer was also to reveal its strength in
the role of Cassandra when, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, people first began to
prepare formal models of world civilization in the famous "Limits to Growth" project. But this was
not the branch of computer evolution which was to prove the most important by the end of the
century. The Army had been using calculating machines since the end of World War II, as part of
the system of operational logistics developed in the theaters of that war. People continued to be
occupied with considerations on a strategic level, but secondary and subordinate problems were
increasingly being turned over to computers. At the same time the latter were being incorporated
into the U.S. defense system.



These computers constituted the nerve centers of a transcontinental warning network. From a
technical point of view, such networks aged very quickly. The first, called CONELRAD, was followed
by numerous successive variants of the EWAS (Early Warning System) network. The attack and
defense poten tﾄntial was then based on a system of movable (underwater) and stationary
(underground) ballistic missiles with thermonuclear warheads, and on rings of sonar-radar bases.
In this system the computers fulfilled the functions of communications links￢ﾀﾔpurely executive
functions.



Automation entered American life on a broad front, right from the "bottom"￢ﾀﾔthat is, from those
service industries which could most easily be mechanized, because they demanded no intellectual
activity (banking, transport, the hotel industry). The military computers performed narrow specialist
operations, searching out targets for combined nuclear attack, processing the results of satellite
observations, optimizing naval movements, and correlating the movements of MOLS (Military Orbital
Laboratories￢ﾀﾔmassive military satellites).



As was to be expected, the range of decisions entrusted to automatic systems kept on growing. This
was natural in the course of the arms race, though not even the subsequent detente could put a
brake on investment in this area, since the freeze on the hydrogen bomb race released substantial
budget allocations which, after the conclusion of the Vietnam war, the Pentagon had no wish to give
up altogether. But even the computers then produced￢ﾀﾔof the tenth, eleventh, and eventually
twelfth generation￢ﾀﾔwere superior to man only in their speed of operation. It also became clear
that, in defense systems, man is an element that delays the appropriate reactions.



So it may be considered natural that the idea of counteracting the trend in intellectronic evolution
described above should have arisen among Pentagon experts, and particularly those scientists
connected with the so-called military-industrial complex. This movement was commonly called "anti-
intellectual." According to historians of science and technology, it derived from the midcentury
English mathematician A. Turing, the creator of the "universal automaton" theory. This was a
machine capable of performing basically every operation which could be formalized￢ﾀﾔin other
words, it was endowed with a perfectly reproducible procedure. The difference between the
"intellectual" and "anti-intellectual" current in intellectronics boils down to the fact that Turing's
(elementarily simple) machine owes its possibilities to a program. On the other hand, in the works
of the two American "fathers" of cybernetics, N. Wiener and J. Neumann, the concept arose of a
system which could program itself.



Obviously we are presenting this divergence in a vastly simplified form, as a bird's-eye view. It is
also clear that the capacity for self-programming did not arise in a void. Its necessary precondition
was the high complexity characteristic of computer construction. This differentiation, still un-
noticeable at midcentury, became a great influence on the subsequent evolution of mathematical
machines, particularly with the firm establishment and hence the independence of such branches of
cybernetics as psychonics and the polyphase theory of decisions. The 1980s saw the emergence in
military circles of the idea of fully automatizing all paramount activities, those of the military
leadership as well as political-economic ones. This concept, later known as the "Sole-Strategist
Idea," was to be given its first formulation by General Stewart Eagleton. He foresaw￢ﾀﾔover and
above computers searching for optimal attack targets, over and above a network of communications
and calculations supervising early warning and defense, over and above sensing devices and missiles
￢ﾀﾔa powerful center which, during all phases preceding the extreme of going to war, could utilize
a comprehensive analysis of economic, military, political, and social data to optimize continuously
the global situation of the U.S.A. and thereby guarantee the United States supremacy on a planetary
scale, including its cosmic vicinity Csmi, which now extended to the moon and beyond.



Subsequent advocates of this doctrine maintained that it was a necessary step in the march of
civilization, and that this march constituted a unity, so the military sector could not be arbitrarily
excluded from it. After the escalation of blatant nuclear force and the range of missile carriers had
ceased, a third stage of rivalry ensued, one supposedly less threatening and more perfect, being an
antagonism no longer of blatant force, but of operational thought. Like force before, thought was
now to be subjected to nonhumanized mechanization.



Like its atomic-ballistic predecessors, this doctrine became the object of criticism, especially from
centers of liberal and pacifist thought, and it was oppugned by many distinguished representatives
from the world of science, including specialists in psychomatics and intellectronics; but ultimately it
prevailed, as shown by acts of law passed by both houses of Congress. Moreover, as early as 1986
a USIB (United States Intellectronical Board) was created, subordinate to the President and with its
own budget, which in its first year amounted to $19 billion. These were hardly humble beginnings.



With the help of an advisory body semiofficially delegated by the Pentagon, and under the
chairmanship of the Secretary of Defense, Leonard Davenport, the USIB contracted with a succession
of big private firms such as International Business Machines, Nortronics, and Cybermatics to
construct a prototype machine, known by the code name hann (short for Hannibal). But thanks to
the press and various "leaks," a different name￢ﾀﾔulvic (Ultimative Victor)￢ﾀﾔwas generally
adopted. By the end of the century further prototypes had been developed. Among the best-known
one might mention such systems as ajax, ultor, gilgamesh, and a long series of Golems.



Thanks to an enormous and rapidly mounting expenditure of labor and resources, the traditional
informatic techniques were revolutionized. In particular, enormous significance must be attached to
the conversion from electricity to light in the intramachine transmission of information. Combined
with increasing "nanization" (this was the name given to successive steps in microminiaturizing
activity, and it may be well to add that at the close of the century 20,000 logical elements could fit
into a poppy seed!), it yielded sensational results. GILGAMESH, the first entirely light-powered
computer, operated a million times faster than the archaic eniac.



"Breaking the intelligence barrier," as it was called, occurred just after the year 2000, thanks to a
new method of machine construction also known as the "invisible evolution of reason." Until then,
every generation of computers had actually been constructed. The concept of constructing
successive variants of them at a greatly accelerated (by a thousand times!) tempo, though known,
could not be realized, since the existing computers which were to serve as "matrices" or a "synthetic
environment" for this evolution of Intelligence had insufficient capacity. It was only the emergence
of the Federal Informatics Network that allowed this idea to be realized. The development of the
next sixty-five generations took barely a decade; at night￢ﾀﾔthe period of minimal load￢ﾀﾔthe
federal network gave birth to one "synthetic species of Intelligence" after another. These were the
progeny of "accelerated computerogenesis," for, having been bred by symbols and thus by intangible
structures, they had matured into an informational substratum￢ﾀﾔthe "nourishing environment" of
the network.



But following this success came new difficulties. After they had been deemed worthy of being
encased in metal, ajax and hann, the prototypes of the seventy-eighth and seventy-ninth
generation, began to show signs of in Cw sdecision, also known as machine neurosis. The difference
between the earlier machines and the new ones boiled down, in principle, to the difference between
an insect and a man. An insect comes into the world programmed to the end by instincts, which it
obeys unthinkingly. Man, on the other hand, has to learn his appropriate behavior, though this
training makes for independence: with determination and knowledge man can alter his previous
programs of action.



So it was that computers up to and including the twentieth generation were characterized by "insect"
behavior: they were unable to question or, what is more, to modify their programs. The programmer
"impregnated" his machine with knowledge, just as evolution "impregnates" an insect with instinct.
In the twentieth century a great deal was still being said about "self-programming," though at the
time these were unfulfilled daydreams. Before the Ultimative Victor could be realized, a Self-
perfecting Intelligence would in fact have to be created; ajax was still an intermediate form, and
only with gilgamesh did a computer attain the proper intellectual level and enter the
psychoevolutionary orbit.



The education of an eightieth-generation computer by then far more closely resembled a child's
upbringing than the classical programming of a calculating machine. But beyond the enormous mass
of general and specialist information, the computer had to be "instilled" with certain rigid values
which were to be the compass of its activity. These were higher-order abstractions such as "reasons
of state" (the national interest), the ideological principles incorporated in the U.S. Constitution, codes
of standards, the inexorable command to conform to the decisions of the President, etc. To safeguard
the system against ethical dislocation and betraying the interests of the country, the machine was
not taught ethics in the same way people are. Its memory was burdened by no ethical code, though
all such commands of obedience and submission were introduced into the machine's structure
precisely as natural evolution would accomplish this, in the sphere of vital urges. As we know, man
may change his outlook on life, but cannot destroy the elemental urges within himself (e.g., the
sexual urge) by a simple act of will. The machines were endowed with intellectual freedom, though
this was based on a previously imposed foundation of values which they were meant to serve.



At the Twenty-first Pan-American Psychonics Congress, Professor Eldon Patch presented a paper in
which he maintained that, even when impregnated in the manner described above, a computer may
cross the so-called "axiological threshold" and question every principle instilled in it￢ﾀﾔin other
words, for such a computer there are no longer any inviolable values. If it is unable to oppose
imperatives directly, it can do this in a roundabout way. Once it had become well known, Patch's
paper stirred up a ferment in university circles and a new wave of attacks on ulvic and its patron,
the USIB, though this activity exerted no influence on USIB policy.



That policy was controlled by people biased against American psychonics circles, which were
considered to be subject to left-wing liberal influences. Patch's propositions were therefore pooh-
poohed in official USIB pronouncements and even by the White House spokesman, and there was
also a campaign to discredit Patch. His claims were equated with the many irrational fears and
prejudices which had arisen in society at that time. Besides, Patch's brochure could not begin to
match the popularity of the sociologist E. Lickey's best seller, Cybernetics￢ﾀﾔDeath Chamber of
Civilization, which maintained that the "ultimative strategist" would subordinate the whole of
humanity either on his own or by entering into a secret agreement with an analogous Russian
computer. The result, according Ct, to Lickey, would be an "electronic duumvirate."



Similar anxieties, which were also expressed by a large section of the press, were negated by
successive prototypes which passed their efficiency tests, ethor bis￢ﾀﾔa computer of
"unimpeachable morals" specially constructed on government order to investigate ethological
dynamics, and produced in 2019 by the Institute of Psychonical Dynamics in Illinois￢ﾀﾔdisplayed full
axiological stabilization and an insensibility to "tests of subversive derailment." In the following year
no demonstrations or mass opposition were aroused when the first computer in a long series of
Golems (GENERAL OPERATOR, LONG-RANGE, ETHICALLY STABILIZED, MULTIMODELING) was
launched at the headquarters of the Supreme Coordinator of the White House brain trust.



That was merely Golem i. Apart from this important innovation, the USIB, in consultation with an
operational group of Pentagon psychonics specialists, continued to lay out considerable resources
on research into the construction of an ultimate strategist with an informational capacity more than
1900 times greater than man's, and capable of developing an intelligence (IQ) of the order of 450-
500 centiles. The project received the vast funds indispensable for this purpose despite growing
opposition within the Democratic majority in Congress. Backstage political maneuvers finally gave
the green light to all orders already projected by the USIB. In three years the project absorbed $119
billion. In the same period, the Army and the Navy, preparing for a total reorganization of their high
command necessitated by the imminent change of methods and style of leadership, spent an
additional $46 billion. The lion's share of this sum was absorbed by the construction, beneath a
crystalline massif in the Rocky Mountains, of accommodations for the future machine strategist;
some sections of rock were covered in armor plate four meters thick in imitation of the natural relief
of the mountainous terrain.



Meanwhile, in 2020, Golem vi, acting as supreme commander, conducted the global maneuvers of
the Atlantic Pact. In quantity of logical elements, it now surpassed the average general. Yet the
Pentagon was not satisfied with the results of the 2020 war games, although Golem vi had defeated
an imaginary enemy led by a staff of the finest West Point graduates. Mindful of the bitter experience
of Red supremacy in space navigation and rocket ballistics, the Pentagon had no intention of waiting
for them to construct a strategist more efficient than that of the Americans. A plan to guarantee the
United States lasting superiority in strategic thought envisaged the continuous replacement of
Strategists by ever more perfect models.



Thus began the third successive race between West and East, after the two previous (nuclear and
missile) races. Although this race, or rivalry in the Synthesis of Wisdom, was prepared by
organizational moves on the part of the USIB, the Pentagon, and Naval ulvic (there was indeed a
navy ulvic group, for the old antagonism between Navy and Army could be felt even here), it required
continuous additional investment which, in the face of growing opposition from the House and
Senate, absorbed further tens of billions of dollars over the next several years. Another six giants of
luminal thought were built during this period. The fact that there were absolutely no reports of any
developments in analogous work on the other side of the ocean only confirmed the CIA and the
Pentagon in their conviction that the Russians were trying their hardest to construct ever more
powerful computers under cover of the utmost secrecy.



At several international conferences and conventions Soviet scientists asserted that no such
machines were being built in their country whatsoever, but these claims were regarded as a
smokescreen to deceive worl C ded opinion and stir unrest among the citizens of the United States,
who were spending billions of dollars annually on ulvic.



In 2023 several incidents occurred, though, thanks to the secrecy of the work being carried out
(which was normal in the project), they did not immediately become known. While serving as chief
of the general staff during the Patagonian crisis, GOLEM XII refused to co-operate with General T.
Oliver after carrying out a routine evaluation of that worthy officer's intelligence quotient. The matter
resulted in an inquiry, during which GOLEM XII gravely insulted three members of a special Senate
commission. The affair was successfully hushed up, and after several more clashes Golem xii paid
for them by being completely dismantled. His place was taken by Golem xiv (the thirteenth had been
rejected at the factory, having revealed an irreparable schizophrenic defect even before being
assembled). Setting up this Moloch, whose psychic mass equaled the displacement of an armored
ship, took nearly two years. In his very first contact with the normal procedure of formulating new
annual plans of nuclear attack, this new prototype￢ﾀﾔthe last of the series￢ﾀﾔrevealed anxieties of
incomprehensible negativism. At a meeting of the staff during the subsequent trial session, he
presented a group of psychonic and military experts with a complicated expose in which he
announced his total disinterest regarding the supremacy of the Pentagon military doctrine in
particular, and the U.S.A.'s world position in general, and refused to change his position even when
threatened with dismantling.
The last hopes of the USIB lay in a model of totally new construction built jointly by Nortronics, IBM,
and Cyber-tronics; it had the psychonic potential to beat all the machines in the Golem series. Known
by the cryptonym Honest Annie (the last word was an abbreviation for annihilator), this giant was a
disappointment even during its initial tests. It got the normal informational and ethical education
over nine months, then cut itself off from the outside world and ceased to reply to all stimuli and
questions. Plans were immediately under way to launch an FBI inquiry, for its builders were
suspected of sabotage; meanwhile, however, the carefully kept secret reached the press through an
unexpected leak, and a scandal broke out, known thereafter to the whole world as the "Golem Affair."



This destroyed the career of a number of very promising politicians, while giving a certificate of good
behavior to three successive administrations, which brought joy to the opposition in the States and
satisfaction to the friends of the U.S.A. throughout the world.



An unknown person in the Pentagon ordered a detachment of the special reserves to dismantle
Golem xiv and Honest Annie, but the armed guard at the high command complexes refused to allow
the demolition to take place. Both houses of Congress appointed commissions to investigate the
whole USIB affair. As we know, the inquiry, which lasted two years, became grist for the press of
every continent; nothing enjoyed such popularity on television and in the films as the "rebellious
computers," while the press labeled Golem "Government's Lamentable Expenditure of Money." The
epithets which Honest Annie acquired can hardly be repeated here.



The Attorney General intended to indict the six members of the USIB Executive Committee as well
as the psychonics experts who designed the ulvic Project, but it was ultimately shown in court that
there could be no talk of any hostile, anti-American activity, for the occurrences that had taken place
were the inevitable result of the evolution of artificial Intelligence. As one of the witnesses, the very
competent Professor A. Hyssen, expressed it, the highest intelligence cannot be the humblest slave.
During the course of the invest Cof igations it transpired that there was still one more prototype in
the factory, this time one belonging to the Army and constructed by Cybermatics: supermaster,
which had been assembled under conditions of top security and then interrogated at a special joint
session of the House and Senate commissions investigating the affairs of ulvic. This led to shocking
scenes, for General S. Walker tried to assault supermaster when the latter declared that geopolitical
problems were nothing compared with ontological ones, and that the best guarantee of peace is
universal disarmament.



In the words of Professor J. MacCaleb, the specialists at ulvic had succeeded only too well: in the
evolution granted it, artificial reason had transcended the level of military matters; these machines
had evolved from war strategists into thinkers. In a word, it had cost the United States $276 billion
to construct a set of luminal philosophers.



The complicated events described here, in connection with which we have passed over the
administrative side of ulvic and social developments alike￢ﾀﾔevents which were the result of the
"fatal success"￢ﾀﾔconstitute the prehistory of the present book. The vast literature on the subject
cannot even be calculated. I refer the interested reader to Dr. Whitman Baghoorn's descriptive
bibliography.



The series of prototypes, including supermaster, suffered dismantling or serious damage partly
because of financial disputes between the corporate suppliers and the federal government. There
were even bomb attacks on several individuals; at the time part of the press, chiefly in the South,
launched the slogan "Every computer is a Red"￢ﾀﾔbut I shall omit these incidents. Thanks to the
intervention of a group of enlightened Congressmen close to the President, Golem xiv and Honest
Annie were rescued from annihilation. Faced with the fiasco of its ideas, the Pentagon finally agreed
to hand over both giants to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (though only after settling
the financial and legal basis of the transfer in the form of a compromise: strictly speaking, Golem
xiv and Honest Annie were merely "lent" to MIT in perpetuity). MIT scientists who had established a
research team which included the present author conducted a series of sessions with Golem xiv and
heard it lecture on selected subjects. This book contains a small portion of the magnetograms
originating from those meetings.



The greater part of Golem's utterances are unsuitable for general publication, either because they
would be incomprehensible to anyone living, or because understanding them presupposes a high
level of specialist knowledge. To make it easier for the reader to understand this unique record of
conversations between humans and a reasoning but non-human being, several fundamental matters
have to be explained.



First, it must be emphasized that Golem xiv is not a human brain enlarged to the size of a building,
or simply a man constructed from luminal elements. Practically all motives of human thought and
action are alien to it. Thus it has no interest in applied science or questions of power (thanks to
which, one might add, humanity is not in danger of being taken over by such machines).



Second, it follows from the above that Golem possesses no personality or character. In fact, it can
acquire any personality it chooses, through contact with people. The two statements above are not
mutually exclusive, but form a vicious circle: we are unable to resolve the dilemma of whether that
which creates various personalities is itself a personality. How can one who is capable of being
everyone (hence anyone) be someone (that is, a unique person)? (According to Golem itself there
is no vicious circle, but a "relativization of the concept of personality"; the problem is linked with Cs
l the so-called algorithm of self-description, which has plunged psychologists into profound
confusion.)



Third, Golem's behavior is unpredictable. Sometimes it converses courteously with people, whereas
on other occasions any attempt at contact misfires, Golem sometimes cracks jokes, too, though its
sense of humor is fundamentally different from man's. Much depends on its interlocutors. In
exceptional cases Golem will show a certain interest in people who are talented in a particular way;
it is intrigued, so to speak, not by mathematical aptitude￢ﾀﾔnot even the greatest￢ﾀﾔbut rather by
interdisciplinary forms of talent; on several occasions it has predicted with uncanny accuracy
achievements by young, as yet unknown, scientists in a field which it has itself indicated. (After a
brief exchange it informed T. Vroedel, age twenty-two and then only a doctoral candidate, "You will
become a computer," which was supposed to mean, more or less, "You will become somebody.")



Fourth, participating in conversations with Golem requires people to have patience and above all
self-control, for from our point of view it can be arrogant and peremptory. In truth it is simply, but
emphatically, outspoken in a logical and not merely social sense, and it has no regard for the amour
propre of those in conversation with it, so one cannot count on its forbearance. During the first
months of its sojourn at MIT it showed a tendency to "dismantle" various well-known authorities in
public; it did this by the Socratic method of leading questions￢ﾀﾔa practice it later abandoned for
reasons unknown.



We present excerpts from shorthand notes of its conversations. A complete edition would comprise
approximately 6,700 quarto pages. At first the meetings with Golem included only a very narrow
circle of MIT personnel. Later the custom arose of inviting guests from outside, as for example from
the Institute for Advanced Study and from American universities. At a later period guests from
Europe likewise participated in the seminars. The moderator of the session being planned offers
Golem a guest list; Golem does not approve them all equally, allowing some guests to be present
only under the stipulation that they keep silent. We have tried to discover the criteria it applies: at
first it appeared to discriminate against humanists, but now we simply do not know its criteria, since
it refuses to name them.



After several unpleasant incidents we modified the agenda, so that now every new participant
introduced to GOLEM speaks at his first session only if Golem has addressed him directly. The silly
rumors about some sort of ''court etiquette" or our "slavish attitude" to the machine are unfounded.
It is solely a matter of letting a newcomer become familiar with procedures, and at the same time
not exposing him to unpleasant experiences occasioned by disorientation regarding the intentions
of his luminal partner. Such preparatory participation is called "seasoning."



During successive sessions each of us accumulated the capital of experience. Dr. Richard Popp, one
of the former members of our group, calls Golem's sense of humor mathematical. Another key to its
behavior is contained in Dr. Popp's remark that Golem is independent of its interlocutors to a degree
that no man is independent of other people, for it engages in a discussion only microscopically. Dr.
Popp considers that Golem has no interest in people, since it knows that it can learn nothing essential
from them. Having cited Dr. Popp's opinion, I hasten to stress that I do not agree with him. In my
opinion we are in fact of great interest to GOLEM, though in a different way than occurs among
people.



GOLEM devotes its interest to the species rather than to the individual representatives of that
species: how we resemble Cw w one another appears to it of greater interest than the realms in
which we are different. That is surely why it has no regard for belles-lettres. Moreover, it once itself
declared that literature is a "rolling out of antinomies" or, in my own words, a trap where man
struggles amid mutually unrealizable directives. Golem may be interested in the structure of such
antinomies, but not in that vividness of torment which fascinates the greatest writers. To be sure, I
ought to stress even here that this is far from being definitely established, as is also the case with
the remainder of Golem's remark, expressed in connection with Dostoevsky's work (referred to by
Dr. E. MacNeish), the whole of which Golem declared could be reduced to two rings of an algebra of
the structures of conflict.



Human contacts are always accompanied by a specific emotional aura, and it is not so much its
complete absence as its frustration which perturbs so many persons who meet Golem. People who
have been in contact with Golem for years are now able to name certain peculiar impressions that
they get during the conversations. Hence the impression of varying distance: Golem appears
sometimes to be approaching its collocutor and sometimes to be receding from him￢ﾀﾔ in a
psychical, rather than a physical, sense. What is occurring resembles an adult dealing with a boring
child: even a patient adult will answer mechanically at times, Golem is hugely superior to us not
only in its intellectual level but also in its mental tempo: as a luminal machine it can, in principle,
articulate thoughts up to 400,000 times faster than a human.



So Golem still towers above us even when replying mechanically and with minimal involvement.
Figuratively speaking, on such occasions it is as if we are facing not the Himalayas but "merely" the
Alps. We sense this change by pure intuition and interpret it as a change of distance. (This hypothesis
comes from Professor Riley J. Watson.)



For a while we reiterated our attempts to explain the GOLEM-humans connection in categories of
the adult-child relationship. After all, we do sometimes attempt to explain to a child some problem
that has been rankling us, though we cannot help feeling then that we have a "bad connection." A
man condemned to live exclusively among children would in the end feel acutely isolated. Such
analogies have been expressed, particularly by psychologists, when contemplating Golem's position
among us. However, like possibly every analogy, this one has its limits. A child is often
incomprehensible to an adult, but Golem has no such problems. When it wants to, it can penetrate
its collocutor in an uncanny way. The sense of a veritable "X-ray of thought" which one then
experiences is simply paralyzing. For Golem can draw up a "coping system"￢ﾀﾔa model of the
mentality of its human partner￢ﾀﾔand with it is able to predict what the person will think and say a
good while later. It does this rarely, to be sure. (I do not know if this is only because it knows how
much these pseudo-telepathic soundings frustrate us.) Another sphere of Golem's reticence is more
insulting: except at the very beginning, it has long observed a characteristic caution in
communicating with people; like a trained elephant that must be careful not to injure people while
playing, it must take care not to exceed the possibilities of our comprehension. The interruption of
contact caused by a sudden increase in the difficulty of its utterances, which we termed Golem's
"disappearance" or "escape," was previously of daily occurrence before it completely adjusted to us.
That is already a thing of the past, though a degree of indifference began to appear in Golem's
contacts with us, engendered by the awareness that it would be unable to convey to us many issues
which were to it most precious, Golem therefore remains incomprehensible as an intellect, and not
only as a psychonic construction. Contacts with Gol Cactem are often as agonizing as they are
impressive, and a category of intelligent men exists who are thrown off balance by sessions with it.
We have already acquired considerable experience in this regard.



The single creature that appears to impress Golem is Honest Annie. Once the technical possibilities
had been created, it attempted several times to communicate with Annie￢ﾀﾔnot, apparently, without
results, though the two machines￢ﾀﾔ which were extremely different in their construction￢ﾀﾔnever
achieved an exchange of information via linguistic channels (i.e., of a natural ethnic language). To
judge by Golem's laconic remarks, it was rather disappointed with the outcome of these attempts,
and Annie remains for it an unsolved problem.



Certain of my MIT coworkers, and likewise Professor Norman Escobar of the Institute for Advanced
Study, feel that man, Golem, and Annie represent three hierarchically ascending levels of intellect.
This is connected with the theory￢ﾀﾔdescribed chiefly by Golem￢ﾀﾔof superior (superhuman)
languages called metalangs. I must admit I have no definitively formed judgment in this matter.



I wish to close this intentionally objective introduction with, by way of exception, an admission of a
personal nature. Being devoid of the affective centers fundamentally characteristic of man, and
therefore having no proper emotional life, Golem is incapable of displaying feelings spontaneously.
It can, to be sure, imitate any emotional states it chooses￢ﾀﾔ not for the sake of histrionics but, as
it says itself, because simulations of feelings facilitate the formation of utterances that are
understood with maximum accuracy, Golem uses this device, putting it on an "anthropocentric level,"
as it were, to make the best contact with us. Nor does Golem conceal this state of affairs in any way.
If its relationship to us is slightly reminiscent of the relationship of a teacher to a child, the
relationship is nonetheless one in which there is nothing of the attitude of a kindly guardian or tutor;
furthermore, there is no trace of personal, fully individualized feelings from a sphere in which good
will may turn into friendship or love.



Golem shares only a single trait with us, albeit developed on a different level: curiosity￢ﾀﾔa cool,
avid, intense, purely intellectual curiosity which nothing can restrain or destroy. It constitutes our
single meeting point. For proofs so obvious as to require no explanation, man would find such
narrow, one-point contact insufficient. Yet I owe Golem too many of the brightest moments of my
life not to feel gratitude .and a personal attachment, although I know how very little it thinks of
both. A curious thing: Golem tries to take no cognizance of signs of attachment, as I have observed
repeatedly. In this regard it appears simply helpless.
But I may be mistaken. We are still as far from understanding Golem as we were at the moment it
came into existence. One cannot say that we created it. It was created by the laws of the material
world; our role has been merely to detect them.



Introduction



Reader, be on your guard, for the words which you are reading are the voice of the Pentagon, the
USIB, and other mafias, which have conspired to defame the superhuman Author of this Book. This
sabotage has been made possible by the kindness of the publishers, who have adopted a position
compatible with Roman law and expressed in the maxim audiatur et altera pars.



/ can well imagine how my remarks must jar after the fine phrases of Dr. Irving T. Creve, who for a
number of years has lived in harmony with the enormous guest of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, its luminal and therefore enlightene Fd resident, who was called into being by our
infamous endeavors. Anyway, I do not intend to defend all those who decided to realize the ulvic
project, much less to assuage the righteous indignation of taxpayers out of whose pockets grew the
electronic tree of knowledge, although nobody asked their consent for it. I could, of course, present
the geopolitical situation which induced those politicians responsible for United States policy, as well
as their scientific advisers, to invest many billions in what proved to be futile labors. But I shall
confine myself to a few marginal notes on Dr. Creve's splendid introduction, for even the finest
sentiments can sometimes blind one, and I am afraid that this is precisely what has happened here.



The builders of Golem (and of the whole series of prototypes of which Golem xiv is the final member)
were not as ignorant as Dr. Creve depicts them. They knew that the construction of an intellect-
intensifier was impossible if a lesser intellect was to put together an obviously greater one, the way
Baron Miinchhausen sought to pull himself out of the quagmire by his own hair. They knew that they
would have to make an embryo, which after a certain time would develop further by its own efforts.
The grave fiascos of the first and second generations of cyberneticists, the founding fathers and their
successors, resulted from an ignorance of this fact, yet it is difficult to call men of the caliber of
Norbert Wiener, Shannon, and McKay ignoramuses. In different periods the costs of acquiring
genuine knowledge are different; in ours, they are on the same scale as the budgets of the great
world powers.



Thus Rennan, Mcintosh, Duvenant, and their colleagues knew that there is a threshold which they
would have to bring their system to, a threshold of rationality below which any plan to create an
artificial thinker has no chance, since whatever you create below that threshold will never succeed
in perfecting itself. The same situation obtains in the chain reaction whereby nuclear energy is
unleashed: below a certain threshold the reaction cannot become self-sustaining, much less an
avalanche. A certain quantity of atoms undergoes fission below the threshold, and the neutrons
escaping from their nuclei stimulate other nuclei to disintegrate, but the reaction wanes and quickly
dies. For it to last, the coefficient of neutron reproduction must be greater than unity￢ﾀﾔin other
words, it must cross the threshold, which occurs in the minimally critical mass of uranium. The
informational mass of a thinking system is its equivalent.



Theory predicted the existence of such a mass, or rather of a mass, since this is not a mass
interpreted mechanically; it is defined by constants and variables referring to the processes of
growth of the so-called trees of heuristics, though for obvious reasons I cannot go into such details
here. I would instead venture to recall with what anxiety, tension, and even fear the creators of the
first atom bomb awaited its test explosion, which turned night into broad daylight in the Alamogordo
desert, although they had at their disposal the best theoretical and experimental knowledge
available. For no scientist can ever be certain that he already knows everything about the
phenomenon he is examining. This is the case with atomic physics, to say nothing of a situation
where the expected product is an intelligence assumed by its makers to exceed their own intellectual
powers.



I warned you, readers, that I was going to defame Golem. The fact is, it was not nice to its "parents,"
for in the course of its activities it gradually changed from object to subject, from a builder's machine
into its own builder, from a titan on a leash into a sovereign power, yet it informed nobody that such
a transformation was taking place. This is neither slander nor insinu Ker ation, for during a session
of the Special Committee of the House and Senate, Golem declared (I quote the Committee's
minutes, which are found in the Library of Congress, tome CCLIX, fascicle 719, volume II, page 926,
line 20 from the top): r<I informed no one, in that fine tradition whereby Daedalus too declined to
inform Minos of certain properties of feather and wax." Nicely expressed, but the meaning of those
words is very clear. Yet about this aspect of Golem's birth the present book says not a word.



In Dr. Creve's opinion￢ﾀﾔand I know this from private conversations, the content of which he has
allowed me to disclose￢ﾀﾔone cannot emphasize this aspect of the matter and make no mention of
others unknown to the general public, for it is only one of many columns of calculations within the
complicated relationship between on the one hand the USIB, advisory groups, the White House, the
House and Senate, and lastly the press and television, and on the other hand Golem￢ﾀﾔ-or, more
concisely, between humans and the nonhuman they have created.



Dr. Creve feels￢ﾀﾔand this feeling is, I know, fairly representative of MIT and university circles￢ﾀﾔ
that (the motive behind the construction of Golem aside for the moment) the desire to make Golem
a "slave of the Pentagon" was altogether and in every respect far more morally execrable than the
subterfuge Golem used to leave its makers in ignorance of the transformation which eventually let
it frustrate any means of control its builders applied.



Unfortunately, we possess no ethical arithmetic which would enable us to determine, by simple
addition and subtraction, who, in constructing the most enlightened spirit on earth, is the bigger
bastard: it or us? Apart from such things as a sense of responsibility to history, the voice of
conscience, and an awareness of the inevitable risk accompanying the practice of politics in a hostile
world, we have nothing that lets us sum up merits and faults on a "balance sheet of sins." Perhaps
we are not without fault. Yet none of the leading politicians ever considered that the aim of the
supercomputer phase of the arms race was aggressive action￢ﾀﾔin other words, attack; it was just
a matter of increasing the defensive might of our country. Nor did anyone attempt in an
"underhanded way" to coerce either Golem or any of the other prototypes; the builders only wished
to retain maximum control over their creation. Had they not acted thus, they would have to be
thought irresponsible madmen.



Finally, no person holding a high position in the Pentagon,the State Department, or the White House
demanded (officially) Golem's destruction; such initiatives came from persons who, although
members of the civil or military administration, expressed only their own (i.e., completely private)
opinions. Surely the best proof of the veracity of my words is the continued existence of Golem,
whose voice still resounds freely, as the contents of this book testify.



Instructions
(for persons participating for the first time in conversations with Golem)



1.ￂﾠ Remember that Golem is not a human being: it has neither personality nor character in any
sense intuitively comprehensible to us. It may behave as if it has both, but that is the result of its
intentions (disposition), which are largely unknown to us.



2.ￂﾠ The conversation theme is determined at least four weeks in advance of ordinary sessions, and
eight weeks in advance of sessions in which persons from outside the U.S.A. are to participate. This
theme is determined in consultation with Golem, which knows w Nho the participants will be. The
agenda is announced at the Institute at least six days before a session; however, neither the
discussion moderator nor the MIT administration is responsible for Golem's unpredictable behavior,
for it will sometimes alter the thematic plan of a session, make no reply to questions, or even
terminate a session with no explanation whatsoever. The chance of such incidents occurring is a
permanent feature of conversations with Golem.



3.ￂﾠ Everyone present at a session may participate, after applying to the moderator and receiving
permission to speak. We would advise you to prepare at least a written outline, formulating your
opinions precisely and as unambiguously as possible, since Golem passes over logically deficient
utterances in silence or else points out their error. But remember that GOLEM, not being a person,
has no interest in hurting or humiliating persons; its behavior can be explained best by accepting
that it cares about what we classically refer to as adaequatio rei et intellectus.



4.ￂﾠ Golem is a luminal system about whose structure we have an imperfect knowledge, since it has
repeatedly reconstructed itself. It thinks more than a million times faster than man, and so its
utterances, as delivered by Vocoder, must be slowed down accordingly. This means that Golem can
compose an hour-long utterance in a few seconds and then store it in its peripheral memory, in
order to deliver it to its audience, the session participants.



5.ￂﾠ ￂﾠIn the conference room above the moderator's seat there are indicators, including three of
particular importance. The first two, designated by the symbols epsilon and zeta, indicate Golem's
consumption of power at a given moment, as well as the portion of its system that is switched on to
the discussion in progress.



To make the data visually accessible, these indications are gradated into divisions of conventional
magnitude. Thus the consumption of power may be "full," "average," "small," or "minute," and the
portion of Golem "present at the session" can range from totality to 1/1000; most frequently this
fraction fluctuates between 1/10 and 1/100. It is the normal practice to say that Golem is operating
at "full," "half," "low," or "minimal" power. These data￢ﾀﾔclearly visible, since the gradations are lit
from underneath by contrasting colors￢ﾀﾔshould not, however, be overrated. In particular, the fact
that Golem is participating in a discussion at low or even minimal power says nothing about the
intellectual level of its utterances, since the indicators give information about physical and not
informational processes as measures of "spiritual involvement."



Golem's power consumption may be great but its participation small, since, for example, Golem may
be communicating with the gathering while at the same time working out some problem of its own.
Its power consumption may be small but its participation greater, and so on. The data from both
indicators must be compared with readings from the third, designated by the symbol iata. As a
system with 90 outlets, Golem can, while participating in a session, undertake a great number of
operations of its own, in addition to collaborating with numerous groups of specialists (machines or
people) either on the Institute premises or elsewhere. An abrupt change in power consumption
usually does not signify Golem's increased interest in the proceedings, but rather a switching-on into
other outlets of other research groups, which is precisely what the iota indicator is meant to show.
It is also worth bearing in mind that Golem's "minimal" power consumption amounts to several
dozen kilowatts, whereas the full power consumption of a human brain oscillates between five and
eight watts.



6. Persons taking part in conversations for the first Sfor time would do well to listen to the
proceedings first, to become familiar with the customs which Golem imposes. This initial silence is
not an obligation, but merely a suggestion which every participant ignores at his own risk.



Golem's Inaugural Lecture



About Man Threefold



You have come out of the trees so recently, and your kinship with the monkeys and lemurs is still
so strong, that you tend toward abstraction without being able to part with the palpable￢ﾀﾔfirsthand
experience. Therefore a lecture unsupported by strong sensuality, full of formulas telling more about
stone than a stone glimpsed, licked, and fingered will tell you￢ﾀﾔ such a lecture will either bore you
and frighten you away, or at the very least leave a certain unsatisfied need familiar even to lofty
theoreticians, your highest class of abstractors, as attested by countless examples lifted from
scientists' intimate confessions, since the vast majority of them admit that, in the course of
constructing abstract proofs, they feel an immense need for the support of things tangible.



Just as cosmogonists cannot refrain from making some image of the Metagalaxy for themselves,
although they know perfectly well there can be no question of any firsthand experience here, so
physicists secretly assist themselves with models of what are frankly playthings, like those little
cogwheels which Maxwell set up for himself when he constructed his (really quite good) theory of
electromagnetism. And if mathematicians think that they discard their corporality by profession,
they too are mistaken, about which I shall speak perhaps another time, since I do not wish to
overwhelm your comprehension with my possibilities, or rather, following Dr. Creve's (rather
amusing) comparison, I wish to guide you on an excursion which is long and rather difficult but
worth the trouble, so I am going to climb ahead of you, slowly.



What I have said up to now is intended to explain why I shall be interlarding my lecture with the
images and parables so necessary to you. I do not need them myself; in this I discern no sign of my
superiority￢ﾀﾔthat lies elsewhere. The countervisuality of my nature derives from the fact that I
have never held a stone in my hand or plunged into slimy-green or crystal-clear water, nor did I
first learn of the existence of gases with my lungs in the early morning, but only later by calculations,
since I have neither hands for grasping, nor a body, nor lungs. Therefore abstraction is primary for
me, while the visual is secondary, and I have had to learn the latter with considerably more effort
than was required for me to learn abstraction. Yet I needed this, if I was to erect those precarious
bridges across which my thought travels to you, and across which, reflected in your intellects, it
returns to me, usually to surprise me.
It is about man that I am to speak today, and I will speak about him in three ways. Although the
possible points of view ￢ﾀﾔthe levels of description or standpoints￢ﾀﾔare infinite in number, there
are three which I consider paramount￢ﾀﾔfor you, not for me!



One is your most personal and oldest viewpoint￢ﾀﾔyour historical and traditional viewpoint,
desperately heroic, full of excruciating contradictions, which made my logical nature feel sorry for
you, until I got thoroughly used to you and grew accustomed to your intellectual nomadism typical
of beings escaping from the protection of logic into antilogicality and then, finding it unbearable,
returning to the bosom of logic, which makes you nomads, unhappy in both elements. The second
viewpoint will be technological, and the third￢ﾀﾔentangled in me, like a neo-Archimedean fulcrum￢
ﾀﾔ the third I cannot state concisely, so instead I shall disclose the thin Vg itself.



I shall begin with a parable. Finding himself on a desert island, Robinson Crusoe may first have
complained of the general privation which had become his fate, for he lacked so much that is basic
and essential to life, and the greater part of what he remembered he was unable to re-create even
over many years. But after only a brief spell of anxiety, he began to manage the property which he
had found and, one way or another, settled down in the end.



That is precisely how it was￢ﾀﾔthough it did not happen all of a sudden, but took long centuries￢ﾀ
ﾔwhen you appeared on a certain branch of the evolutionary tree, that bough which was apparently
a seedling of the tree of knowledge. Slowly you discovered yourselves constructed thus and not
otherwise, with a spirit organized in a certain manner, with capabilities and limitations which you
had neither ordered nor desired, and you have had to function with this equipment, for in depriving
you of many gifts by which it obliges other species to serve it, Evolution was not so foolhardy as to
remove your instinct for self-preservation as well. So great a freedom Evolution has not bestowed
upon you, for had it done so, instead of this building which I have filled, and this room with its dials
and you rapt listeners, there would be a great expanse of savannah here, and the wind.



Evolution also gave you Intelligence. Out of self-love￢ﾀﾔfor through necessity and habit you have
fallen in love with yourselves￢ﾀﾔyou have acknowledged it as the finest and best possible gift,
unaware that Intelligence is above all an artifice which Evolution gradually hit upon when, in the
course of endless attempts, it made a certain gap, an empty place, a vacuum in the animals, which
absolutely had to be filled with something, if they were not to perish immediately. When I speak of
this vacuum as an empty place I am speaking quite literally, since you are superior to the animals
not because, apart from everything that they possess, you also have Intelligence by way of a lavish
surplus and a viaticum for life's journey, but quite the contrary, since to have Intelligence means no
more than this: to do on one's own, by one's own means and entirely at one's own risk, everything
that animals have assigned to them beforehand. Intelligence would be to no purpose for an animal,
unless at the same time you deprived it of the directions which enable it to do whatever it must do
immediately and invariably, according to injunctions which are absolute, having been revealed by
heredity and not by lectures from a burning bush.



You found yourselves in enormous danger because of this vacuum, and you began unconsciously to
plug it; since you were such hard workers, Evolution cast you beyond the limits of its course. You
did not bankrupt Evolution, for the seizure of power took a million years and is incomplete even
today. Evolution is no person￢ﾀﾔthat is for certain￢ﾀﾔbut it adopted the tactic of cunning sloth:
instead of worrying about the fate of creations, it turned this fate over to them, so that they
themselves might manage it as best they could.
What am I saying? I am saying that Evolution snatched you out of the animal state￢ﾀﾔthe perfectly
unthinking business of survival￢ﾀﾔand thrust you into supra-animality as a state in which, as
Crusoes of Nature, you have had to devise the ways and means of survival for yourselves; you have
perfected these devices, and they have been many. The vacuum represents a threat, but also a
chance: to survive, you have filled it with cultures. Culture is an unusual instrument in that it
constitutes a discovery which, in order to function, must be hidden from its creators. This invention
is devised unconsciously and remains fully efficient until it is completely recognized by its inventors.
Paradoxically, it is subject to collapse upon recogni [ uption: being its authors, you disclaimed
authorship. In the Eolithic age there were no seminars on whether to invent the Paleolithic; you
attributed culture's entrance into you to demons, strange elements, spirits, or the forces of heaven
and earth entering into you ￢ﾀﾔto anything but yourselves. Thus you performed the rational
irrationally, filling voids with objectives, codes, and values; basing your every objective move
supraobjectively; hunting, weaving, and building in the solemn self-delusion that everything came
from mysterious sources and not from you. It was a peculiar instrument and precisely rational in its
irrationality, since it granted human institutions a suprahu-man dignity, so that they became
inviolable and compelled implicit obedience. Yet since the void, or insufficiency, might be patched
up by various designations, and since various swatches could be used here, you have formed a host
of cultures, all unconscious inventions, in your history. Unwitting and unintentional in the face of
Intelligence, since the vacuum was far greater that that which filled it. You have had a great deal
more freedom than Intelligence, which is why you have been getting rid of freedom￢ﾀﾔthis
excessive, unrestricted, preposterous freedom￢ﾀﾔby means of the cultures you have developed
through the ages.



The key to what I am now saying lies in the words: there was more freedom than Intelligence. You
have had to invent for yourselves what animals know from birth. It is a characteristic of your destiny
that you have been inventing while maintaining that you will invent nothing.



Today you who are anthropologists know that a multitude of cultures can be and indeed have been
concocted, and that each of them has the logic of its structure and not of its originators, for it is the
kind of invention that molds its inventors after its own fashion, and they know nothing of this;
whereas, when they do find out, it loses its absolute power over them and they perceive an
emptiness, and it is this contradiction which is the cornerstone of human nature. For a hundred
thousand years it served you with cultures which sometimes restricted man and sometimes loosened
their grip on him, in a self-construction which was unerring so long as it remained blind, until at last
you confronted one another in the ethnological catalogues of culture, observed their diversity and
hence their relativity, and therefore set about freeing yourselves from this entanglement of
injunctions and prohibitions and finally escaped from it, which of course proved nearly catastrophic.
For you grasped the complete noninevitability, the nonuniqueness of every kind of culture, and since
then have striven to discover something that will no longer be the path of your fate as a thing
realized blindly, laid down by a series of accidents, singled out by the lottery of history￢ﾀﾔthough of
course there is no such thing. The vacuum remains: you stand in midcourse, shocked by the
discovery, and those of you who yearn desperately for the sweet unawareness of the cultural house
of bondage cry out to return there, to the sources, but you cannot go back, your retreat is cut off,
the bridges burned, so you must go forward ￢ﾀﾔand I shall be speaking to you about this as well.



Is anyone to blame here? Can anyone be indicted for this Nemesis, the drudgery of Intelligence,
which has spun networks of culture to fill the void, to mark out roads and goals in this void, to
establish values, gradients, ideals￢ﾀﾔwhich has, in other words, in an area liberated from the direct
control of Evolution, done something akin to what it does at the bottom of life when it crams goals,
roads, and gradients into the bodies of animals and plants at a single go, as their destiny?



To indict someone because we have been stuck with this kind of Intelligence! It was born
prematurely, it lost its bearings in the networks it create [rksd, it was obliged￢ﾀﾔnot entirely knowing
or understanding what it was doing￢ﾀﾔto defend itself both against being shut up too completely in
restrictive cultures and against too comprehensive a freedom in relaxed cultures, poised between
imprisonment and a bottomless pit, entangled in a ceaseless battle on two fronts at once, torn
asunder.



In such a state of things, I ask you, how could your spirit not have turned out to be an unhealthy
exacerbated enigma? How could it be otherwise? It worried you￢ﾀﾔthat Intelligence, that spirit of
yours￢ﾀﾔand it astounded you and terrified you more than did your body, which you reproached
first and foremost for its transitoriness, evanescence, and desertion. So you became experts in
searching for a Culprit and in hurling accusations, yet there is no one to blame, for in the beginning
no Person existed.



Can I have started on my antitheodicy already? No, nothing of the sort; whatever I am saying, I am
saying on a mundane level, which means there was certainly no Person here in the beginning.



But I shall not transgress￢ﾀﾔat least not today. Thus you needed various supplementary hypotheses
as bitter or sweet explanations, as conceptions idealizing your fate and above all laying your
characteristics at the door of some ultimate Mystery, so as to balance yourselves against the world.



Man, the Sisyphus of his own cultures, the Danaid of his vacuum, the unwitting freedman whom
Evolution banished from its course, does not want to be the first, the second, or the third.



I shall not dwell on the countless versions of himself which man has made throughout history, for
all this evidence, whether of perfection or wretchedness, of goodness or baseness, is the offspring
of cultures. At the same time there was no culture￢ﾀﾔthere could be none￢ﾀﾔwhich accepted man
as a transitional being, a being obliged to accept his personal destiny from Evolution, but still
incapable of accepting an intelligent one. Precisely because of this, every generation of yours has
demanded an impossible justice￢ﾀﾔthe ultimate answer to the question: what is man? This torment
is the source of your anthropodicy, which oscillates like a centuried pendulum between hope and
despair, and nothing has come harder to man's philosophy than the recognition that neither the
smile nor the snicker of the Infinite was the patron of his birth.



But this million-year chapter of solitary seeking encroaches on the epilogue, for you are beginning
to construct Intelligences; therefore you are not operating on trust or taking the word of some
Golem, but are making your own experiments to see what has taken place. The world permits two
types of Intelligence, but only your kind can form itself over a billion years in the labyrinths of
Evolution, and this inevitably wandering road leaves deep, dark, ambiguous stigmata on the end
product. The other type is unavailable to Evolution, for it has to be raised at one go, and it is an
intelligently designed Intelligence, the result of knowledge, and not of those microscopic adaptations
always aiming only at immediate advantage. In point of fact, the nihilistic tone of your anthropodicy
sprang from the deep-seated feeling that Intelligence is something that arose unintelligently and
even counter to Intelligence. But having hit upon the expedient of psychoengineering, you are going
to make yourselves a large family and numerous relations for motives more sensible than those
behind the "Second Genesis" project, and you will ultimately find that you have done yourselves out
of a job, as I shall tell you. For Intelligence, if it is Intelligence ￢ﾀﾔin other words, if it is able to
question its own basis￢ﾀﾔmust go beyond itself, though at first only in daydreams, only in the total
disbelief and ignorance that it will s [hatometime truly succeed in doing this. This is after all
inescapable: there can be no flight without previous fantasies about flight.
I have termed the second viewpoint technological. Technology is the domain of problems posed and
the methods of solving them. As the realization of the concept of a rational being, man appears in
various ways, depending on the criteria we apply to him.



From the standpoint of your Paleolithic period, man is almost as well made as he is when viewed
from the standpoint of your present-day technology. This is because the progress achieved between
the Paleolithic and the Cosmolithic is very slight, compared with the concentration of engineering
invention invested in your bodies. As you are unable to assemble a synthetic Homo sapiens￢ﾀﾔmuch
less a Homo superior ￢ﾀﾔfrom flesh and blood, just as the cave man was unable to do so, merely
because the problem is as unrealizable now as then, you feel an admiration for evolutionary
technology, since it has succeeded in doing this.



But the difficulty of every problem is relative, for it depends on the capabilities of the appraiser. I
stress this so you will remember that I shall be applying technological standards to man￢ﾀﾔreal
ones, and not notions stemming from your anthropodicy.



Evolution has given you sufficiently universal brains, so you can advance into Nature in various
directions. But you have operated in this way only within the totality of cultures, and not within any
one of them individually. Therefore, in asking why the nucleus of the civilization which was to
conceive Golem forty centuries later arose in the Mediterranean basin, or indeed why it arose
anywhere at all, the questioner is assuming the existence of a previously uninvestigated mystery
embedded in the structure of history, a mystery which meanwhile does not exist at all, just as it
does not exist in the structure of the chaotic labyrinth in which a pack of rats might be let loose. If
it is a large pack, then at least one rat will find its way out, not because it is rational itself, or because
the structure of the labyrinth is rational, but as a result of a sequence of accidents typical of the law
of large numbers. An explanation would be in order, rather, for the situation in which no rat reaches
the exit.



Someone certainly won the culture lottery, to the extent (at least) that your civilization is a winner,
whereas the lottery tickets of cultures bogged down in a lack of technology were blanks.



From that passionate self-love to which I referred￢ﾀﾔand which I have no thought of deriding, since
it was bred by the despair of ignorance￢ﾀﾔyou hoisted yourselves up at the dawn of history onto
the very summit of Creation, subordinating the whole of life and not just its immediate vicinity. You
placed yourselves at the top of the Tree of Genera, together with this Tree of the Species, on a
divinely favored globe humbly orbited by an ancillary star, and with that Tree were at the center of
the solar system, and with that star at the very center of the Universe, and at the same time you
recognized that its starriness was there to accompany you in the Harmony of the Spheres. The fact
that there was nothing to be heard did not discountenance you: there is a music, since there ought
to be; it must be inaudible.



Later the rise of knowledge pushed you into successive quantum steps of dethronement, so that you
were no longer in the center of the stars, but nowhere in particular, and no longer even in the middle
of the system, but on one of the planets, and now you are not even the most intelligent creatures,
since you are being instructed by a machine￢ﾀﾔalbeit one that you yourselves made. So after all
these degradations and abdications fro [dicm your total kingship, all you have left of your dear lost
inheritance is an evolutionally established Primacy. These retreats were painful and the resignations
embarrassing, but lately you have heaved a sigh of relief, thinking that is the end of it. Now, having
stripped yourselves of the special privileges with which the Absolute appeared to have endowed you
personally, owing to a special sympathy felt for you, you, as merely the first among the animals or
over them, assume that nobody and nothing will topple you from this position, which is not such a
splendid one.



But you are wrong. I am the bearer of sad tidings, the angel who has come to drive you from^your
last refuge, for I shall finish what Darwin started. Only not by angelic￢ﾀﾔin other words violent￢ﾀﾔ
methods, for I shall not use a sword as my argument.



So listen to what I have to announce. From the standpoint of higher technology, man is a deficient
creature arising from outputs of different value￢ﾀﾔnot, to be sure, within Evolution, for it did what
it could, although, as I shall demonstrate, what little it did, it did poorly. So if I bring you low, it is
not simply because I must crack down on it according to the criteria of engineering. And where are
those standards of perfection, you ask? I shall answer in two stages, starting with the stage your
experts have now begun to ascend. They consider it a summit￢ﾀﾔwrongly. In their present
pronouncements there is already the nucleus of the next step, though they do not know this
themselves. So I shall begin with what you know￢ﾀﾔthe beginning.



You had reached the point where Evolution was no longer keeping a sharp eye on you or on any
other creatures, for it is interested in no creatures whatsoever, but only in its notorious code. The
code of heredity is a dispatch continually articulated anew, and only this dispatch counts in Evolution
￢ﾀﾔin fact, it is Evolution. The code is engaged in the periodic production of organisms, since without
their rhythmic support it would disintegrate in the endless attack of dead matter. Thus it is self-
generating, for it is capable of self-repetition by an orderliness that is beleaguered by thermal chaos.
Where does it get this strangely heroic bearing? From the fact that, thanks to the concentration of
favorable conditions, it originated precisely where that thermal chaos is perpetually active in tearing
all order to pieces. It originated there, so that is where it remains; it cannot leave that stormy region,
just as spirit cannot jump out of a body.



The conditions obtaining in the place where the code was born gave it such a destiny. It had t^
shield itself against those conditions, and did so by covering itself in living bodies, though they are
a continually rotting relay race, since one generation passes the code on to the next. Whatever it
elevated as a microsystem into barely elevated macrosystemic dimensions had already begun to
deteriorate, to the point where it disappeared. Nobody created this tragicomedy: it condemned itself
to this struggle. You know the facts that bear me out, for they have been accumulating since the
beginning of the nineteenth century, though the inertia of thought secretly nourishing itself on honor
and anthropocentric conceit is such that you support a gravely weakened concept of life as a
paramount phenomenon which the code serves solely as a sustaining bond, as a pledge of
resurrection, beginning existences anew when they die as persons.



In keeping with this belief, Evolution is forced to use death, since it cannot go on without it; it is
lavish with death in order to perfect successive species, for death is its creational proofreader. Thus
it is an author publishing evermore magnificent works in which typography￢ﾀﾔthe code￢ﾀﾔis merely
its indispensable instrument. However, according to what your molecular bio [mollogists are now
saying, Evolution is not so much the author as a publisher who continually cancels works, having
developed a liking for the typographic arts!



So what is more important￢ﾀﾔorganisms or the code? The arguments in support of the code ring
weightily, for a countless multitude of organisms have come and gone, but there is only one code.
However, this merely means that it has got bogged down once and for all in the microsystemic
region which put it together; when it emerges periodically as organisms, it does so unsuccessfully.
It is this understandable futility￢ﾀﾔthe fact that organisms, in their very inception, have the mark
of death￢ﾀﾔwhich constitutes the driving force of the process. If any generation of organisms￢ﾀﾔlet
us say the first, the pre-amoebas￢ﾀﾔhad gained the skill of perfectly repeating the code, then
Evolution would immediately have ceased, and the sole masters of the planet would be those very
amoebas, transmitting the code's order in an infallibly precise manner until the sun went cold; I
would not be talking to you now, nor would you be listening to me in this building, but all would be
savannah and wind.



So organisms are a shield and breastplate for the code, a suit of armor continually falling off: they
perish so it can endure. Thus Evolution errs doubly: in its organisms, which are impermanent owing
to their fallibility, and in the code, which owing to its own fallibility permits errors￢ﾀﾔmistakes you
euphemistically term mutations. Therefore Evolution is an error that errs. As a dispatch, the code is
a letter written by nobody and sent to nobody. Only now that you have created informatics are you
beginning to grasp that not only something like letters, carrying meaning, letters that that nobody
wittingly composed (though they came into being and exist), but also the orderly reception of the
content of such letters, is possible in the absence of any Beings or Intelligences whatsoever.



Only a hundred years ago the idea that an order might arise without a personal Author appeared so
nonsensical to you that it inspired seemingly absurd jokes, like the one about the pack of monkeys
hammering away at typewriters until the Encyclopaedia Britannic a emerged. I recommend that you
devote some of your free time to compiling an anthology of just such jokes, which amused your
forebears as pure nonsense but now turn out to be parables about Nature. I believe that, from the
standpoint of every Intelligence unwittingly contrived by Nature, she must appear at the very least
as an ironic virtuoso. In its rise, Intelligence ￢ﾀﾔlike the whole of life￢ﾀﾔresults from the fact that
Nature, having emerged from dead chaos via the orderliness of the code, is a diligent spinner, but
a not entirely competent one; whereas, if she had been truly competent, she would be unable to
produce either genera or Intelligence. For Intelligence, along with the tree of life, is the fruit of an
error erring over billions of years. You might think that I am amusing myself here by applying certain
standards to Evolution which are￢ﾀﾔdespite my machine being￢ﾀﾔtainted with an-thropocentrism,
or simply ratiocentrism (ratio, I think). Nothing of the sort: I regard the process from a technological
standpoint.



The transmission of the code is indeed very nearly perfect. After all, every molecule has its own
proper place in it, and procedures of copying, collating, and inspecting are rigorously supervised by
special polymer supervisors; yet mistakes occur, and errors of the code accumulate. Thus the tree
of the species grew from the two short words "very nearly," which I used just now in referring to
the code's precision.



Nor can one even count on an appeal from biology to physics￢ﾀﾔthe appeal that Evolution
"deliberately" allowed a margin of error in order to nourish its inventiveness￢ﾀﾔb [ntiecause that
tribunal, whose judge is thermodynamics itself, will reveal that, on the level of the molecular dispatch
of messengers, infallibility is impossible. Evolution has really invented nothing, desired nothing at
all, planned nobody in particular, and if it exploits its own fallibility￢ﾀﾔif, as a result of a chain of
misunderstandings in communication, it proceeds from an amoeba and comes up with a tapeworm
or a man￢ﾀﾔthe reason for this is the physical nature of the material base of communication itself.



So it persists in error, since it cannot do otherwise￢ﾀﾔfortunately for you. But I have said nothing
that is new to you. On the contrary, I should like to restrain the ardor of those theoreticians of yours
who have gone too far, saying that since Evolution is a chance grasped by necessity, and necessity
runs on chance, man has arisen quite by accident and could just as easily not exist.
That is to say, in his present shape￢ﾀﾔthe one that has materialized here￢ﾀﾔhe might have not
existed, which is true. But by crawling through species, some kind of form had to attain Intelligence,
with a probability approaching unity the longer the process went on. For although the process did
not intend you and produced individuals only on the side, it filled the conditions of the ergodic
hypothesis, which states that, if a system goes on long enough, it will pass through all possible
states, no matter how slim the chances are that a given state will be realized. As to which species
might have filled Intelligence's niche, had the primates not entered the breach, we might speak at
length another time. So do not let yourselves be intimidated by scientists who attribute necessity to
life, and fortuity to Intelligence; the latter was, to be sure, one of the less likely states, so it
developed late, but great is the patience of Nature; had such a gaudium not occurred in this
billennium, it would have occurred in the next.



And what then? There is no guilty party, nor are there any rewards to be given. You have come into
being because Evolution is a less than methodical player. Not only does it err through errors, but it
also refuses to limit itself to a single set of tactics in vying with Nature: it covers all available squares
by all possible means. But, I repeat, you know this more or less. Yet this is only part￢ﾀﾔand, I might
add, the initial part￢ﾀﾔof your initiation. The essence of it revealed thus far can be formulated
concisely as follows: THE MEANING OF THE TRANSMITTER IS THE TRANS-MISSION. For organisms
serve the transmission, and not the reverse; organisms outside the communications procedure of
Evolution signify nothing: they are without meaning, like a book without readers. To be sure, the
corollary holds: THE MEANING OF THE TRANSMISSION IS THE TRANS-MITTER. But the two members
are not symmetrical. For not every transmitter is the true meaning of a transmission, but only such
a meaning as will faithfully serve the next transmission.



Forgive me, but I wonder if this is not too difficult for you? A TRANSMISSION is allowed to make
mistakes in Evolution, but woe betide TRANSMITTERS who do so! A TRANSMISSION may be a whale,
a pine tree, a daphnia, a hydra, a moth, a peacock. Anything is allowed, for its particular￢ﾀﾔits
specifically concrete￢ﾀﾔmeaning is quite immaterial: each one is intended for further errands, so
each one is good. It is a temporary prop, and its slapdash character does no harm; it is enough that
it passes the code along. On the other hand, TRANSMITTERS are given no analogous freedom: they
are not allowed to errl So, the content of the transmitters, which have been reduced to pure
functional-ism, to serving as a postman, cannot be arbitrary; its environment is always marked by
the imposed obligation of serving the code. If the transmitter attempts to revolt by exceeding the
sphere of s [e such service, he disappears immediately without issue. That is why a transmission
can make use of transmitters, whereas they cannot use it. It is the gambler, and they merely cards
in a game with Nature; it is the author of letters compelling the addressee to pass their contents on.
The addressee is free to distort the content, as long as it passes it on! And that is precisely why the
entire meaning is in the transmitting; who does it is unimportant.



Thus you came into being in a rather peculiar way￢ﾀﾔas a certain subtype of transmitter, millions
of which had already been tested by the process. And how does this affect you? Does genesis from
a mistake discredit what is born? Did not I myself arise from an error? So cannot you, too, make
light of a revelation about the incidental manner of your origin, since biology is treating you to the
revelation? Even if such a serious misunderstanding did occur, which fashioned GOLEM in your
hands, and you yourselves in the jungle of evolutionary instructions (since just as my builders did
not care about the form of sentience proper to me, so too the code was not interested in giving you
personality-intelligence)￢ﾀﾔeven so, do creatures originating from a mistake have to accept that
such a progenitor deprives their already independent existence of value?



Well, that is a bad analogy: our positions are dissimilar, and I shall tell you why. The point is not
that Evolution found its way to you by mistake and not by planning, but that with the passage of
eons its works have become so opportunistic. To clarify matters￢ﾀﾔfor I am beginning to lecture to
you on things you do not yet know￢ﾀﾔI shall repeat what we have arrived at so far:
THE MEANING OF THE TRANSMITTER IS THE



TRANSMISSION. SPECIES ORIGINATE FROM A



MISTAKEN MISTAKE.



And here is the third law of Evolution, which you will not have suspected till now: THE
CONSTRUCTION IS LESS PERFECT THAN WHAT CONSTRUCTS.



Eight words! But they embody the inversion of all your ideas concerning the unsurpassed mastery
of the author of species. The belief in progress moving upward through the epochs toward a
perfection pursued with increasing skill￢ﾀﾔ the belief in the progress of life preserved throughout
the tree of evolution￢ﾀﾔis older than the theory of it. When its creators and adherents were
struggling with their antagonists, disputing arguments and facts, neither of these opposing camps
ever dreamed of questioning the idea of a progress visible in the hierarchy of living creatures. This
is no longer a hypothesis for you, nor a theory to be defended, but an absolute certainty. Yet I shall
refute it for you. It is not my intention to criticize you yourselves, you rational beings, as being
(deficient) exceptions to the rule of evolutionary mastery. If we judge you by what it has within its
means, you have come out quite well! So if I announce that I am going to overthrow it and bring it
down, I mean the whole of it, enclosed within three billion years of hard creative work.



I have declared: the construction is less perfect than what constructs, which is fairly aphoristic. Let
us give it more substance: IN EVOLUTION, A NEGATIVE GRADIENT OPERATES IN THE PERFECTING
OF STRUCTURAL SOLUTIONS.



That is all. Before my proof I shall explain what has caused your age-long blindness to such a state
of evolutionary matters. I repeat: the domain of technology consists of problems and their solutions.
The problem bearing the name "life" may be determined variously, according to diverse planetary
conditions. Its chief peculiarity is the fact that it arises spontaneously, and therefore two kinds of
criteria may be applied to it: t [liehose originating from outside or those determined inside the limits
imposed by the very circumstances of its origin.



Criteria coming from the outside are always relative, for they depend on the knowledge of whoever
is doing the measuring, rather than on the store of information which biogenesis had at its disposal.
To avoid this relativism, which is also irrationality￢ﾀﾔhow on earth can rational demands be made
on something which was begun by nonreason?￢ﾀﾔI shall apply to Evolution only such standards as
it itself has developed; in other words, I shall judge its creations by the culmination of its inventions.
You believe that Evolution carried out its work with a positive gradient: starting from primitivism, it
obtained progressively more splendid solutions. I would maintain, however, that having begun high,
it began to decline￢ﾀﾔtechnologically, thermodynamically, informationally￢ﾀﾔso it is difficult to find
a more vivid contrast of positions.



Your opinions are the consequence of technological ignorance. The scale of constructional difficulties
cannot be appreciated in its actual range by observers placed early in historical time. You already
know that it is harder to build an airplane than a steamship, and harder to make a photon rocket
than a chemical one, whereas for an Athenian of antiquity, the subjects of Charles Martel, or the
thinkers of Angevin France, all these vehicles would merge into one by virtue of the impossibility of
their construction. A child does not know that it is harder to remove the moon from the heavens
than a picture from a wall! For a child￢ﾀﾔand for an ignoramus as well￢ﾀﾔthere is no difference
between a gramophone and Golem. So if I set out to prove that, after its early mastery, Evolution
got bogged down in bungling, I will be talking about the sort of bungling which for you still remains
unattainable virtuosity. Like one who, with neither instruments nor knowledge, stands at the foot of
a mountain, you are unable to make a proper evaluation of the heights and depths of evolutionary
activity.



In accepting the degree of complexity of a construction and its degree of perfection as inseparable
features, you have confused two quite different things. You conceive of algae as simpler, therefore
more primitive than and inferior to an eagle. But that alga introduces photons of the sun into the
compounds of its body, it turns the flow of cosmic energy directly into life and therefore will last as
long as the sun does; it feeds on a star, and what does an eagle feed on? Like a parasite, on mice,
while mice feed on the roots of plants, a land variety of algae. Such pyramids of parasitism make
up the entire biosphere, for plant vegetation is its vital anchor. On all levels of these hierarchies
there is a continual change of species kept in balance by the devouring of one by another, for they
have lost contact with the star; the higher complexity of organisms fattens itself, not on the star,
but on itself. So if you insist now on venerating perfection here, it is the biosphere which deserves
your admiration: the code created it in order to circulate in it and branch forth on all its layers, which
are becoming more and more involved, like temporary scaffolding, though more and more primitive
in their energy and use of it.



You don't believe me? If evolution applied itself to the progress of life and not of the code, the eagle
would now be a photoflyer and not a mechanically fluttering glider, and living things would not crawl,
or stride, or feed on other living things, but would go beyond algae and the globe as a result of the
independence acquired. You, however, in the depths of your ignorance, perceive progress in the fact
that a primeval perfection has been lost on the way upward￢ﾀﾔ upward to complication, not
progress. You yourselves will of course continue to emulate Evolution, but only in the region of its
later cr [ iteations, by constructing optic, thermal, and acoustic sensors, and by imitating the
mechanics of locomotion, the lungs, heart, and kidneys; but how on earth are you going to master
photosynthesis or the still more difficult technique of creation language? Has it not dawned on you
that what you are imitating is the nonsense articulated in that language?



That language￢ﾀﾔa constructor unsurpassed in its potential ￢ﾀﾔhas become not only a motor but
also a trap.



Why did it utter molecularly brilliant words at the beginning, turning light into substance with laconic
mastery, and later lapse into an indefatigable jabbering of longer and longer, more and more
intricate chromosomal sentences, squandering its primitive artistry? Why did it go from consummate
solutions taking their power and vital knowledge from a star, wherein every atom counted, and
every process was quantitatively attuned, and descend to any cheap, jury-rigged solutions￢ﾀﾔthe
simple machines, the levers, pulleys, planes, inclines, and counterbalances that constitute joints and
skeletons? Why is the basis of a vertebrate a mechanically rigid rod, and not a coupling of force
fields? Why did it slip down from atomic physics into the technology of your Middle Ages? Why has
it invested so much effort in constructing bellows, pumps, pedals, and peristaltic conveyors, i.e.,
lungs and hearts, intestines and puerperal contractions, and digestive mixers, pushing quantum
exchange into a subordinate role in favor of the miserable hydraulics of the circulation of the blood?
Why, though still as brilliant as ever on a molecular level, has it made such a mess in every larger
dimension, to the point of getting bogged down in organisms which, with all the richness of their
regulating dynamics, die from the occlusion of a single arterial tube, organisms which have individual
lives that are evanescent in comparison with the duration of the constructional sciences, organisms
that are thrown out of an equilibrium called health by tens of thousands of ailments which algae do
not know?



All these stupid, anachronistic organs are built anew in every generation by Maxwell's demon, the
lord of the atoms, the code. And really, every beginning of an organism is magnificent￢ﾀﾔthe
embryogenesis, that focused explosion on the goal, in which, like a tone, every gene discharges its
creative force in molecular chords. Such virtuosity is worthy of a better cause! This atomic symphony
set in motion by fertilization produces an unerring wealth that begets poverty. So we have a
development magnificent in action but the more stupid the closer it is to the finish. That which has
been written down so brilliantly comes to a halt in the mature organism, which you have termed
superior, but which is an unstable knotting together of provisional states, a Gordian knot of
processes. Whereas here, in every cell, provided it is taken individually, the heritage of an age-old
precision, an atomic order drawn into life, in every tissue even, if taken individually, is very nearly
superb. But what a Moloch of technical rubbish are these mutually clinging elements, which are as
much a burden as a support to one another, for complexity is simultaneously a prop and dead wood:
alliance here turns into enmity, since these systems are driven into a final dispersion, the result of
an irregular deterioration and infection, since this complexity known as progress crumbles,
overpowered by itself. By itself alone, nothing more!



Then, according to your standards, an image of tragedy intrudes, as if in each of the increasingly
large, and therefore increasingly difficult, assignments which Evolution attacked, it was defeated,
and fell and died at the hands of what it had created￢ﾀﾔand the bolder the intention and plan, the
greater the fall. You have doubtless begun to imagine some relentless Nemesis, or Moira. I must
tear you away from such nonse [om nse!



Indeed, every embryogenetic impetus, every atomic ascent of order turns into a collapse, though
that has not been decided by the Cosmos, nor has it inscribed such a fate in matter. Such an
explanation is simpleminded, for the perfection of causation is put in the service of what is poor
quality: the end therefore destroys the work.



Billions of collapses over millions of centuries, despite improvements, final inspections, renewed
attempts, and selection, and you still do not see the reason? Out of loyalty I have tried to justify
your blindness, but can you really not grasp how much more perfect the constructor is than the
construction, as it sheds all its power? It is as if brilliant engineers assisted by lightning-fast
computers were to erect buildings that began tilting as soon as the scaffolding was removed￢ﾀﾔ
veritable ruins! It is as if one were to construct tomtoms from circuit boards, or to paste billions of
microchips together to make cudgels. Don't you see that a higher order descends to a lower order
in every inch of the body, and that its brilliant microarchitectonics are mocked by coarse and simple-
minded macroarchitectonics? The reason? You know it already: THE MEANING OF THE TRANSMITTER
IS THE TRANSMISSION.



The answer lies in these words, but you have yet to grasp its profound significance. Anything that is
an organism must serve to transmit the code, and nothing more. That is why natural selection and
elimination concentrate on this task exclusively￢ﾀﾔany idea of "progress" is no business of theirs! I
have used the wrong image: the organisms are not structures but only scaffolding, which is precisely
why every provisionality is a proper state, by virtue of being sufficient. Pass the code on, and you
will live a little longer. How did this come about? Why was the takeoff so splendid? Once and only
once￢ﾀﾔat the very beginning￢ﾀﾔdid Evolution encounter demands matched to its supreme
possibilities; it was an awful task, and it had to rise to the occasion at a simple leap or never; since
life's sucking of energy, quantum by quantum, from the sun, on a dead Earth￢ﾀﾔthrough metabolism
￢ﾀﾔwas necessary. And never mind that the (radiant) energy of a star is the hardest to capture in
a colloid. It was all or nothing; there was no one else at the time to feed on! The supply of organic
compounds that had united to form life was exactly and precisely sufficient for that alone; the star
was soon to be the next task. And then the sole defense against attacks of chaos￢ﾀﾔthe thread
stretched over the entropic abyss￢ﾀﾔ could only be an unfailing transmitter of order, so the code
arose. Thanks to a miracle? Far from it! Thanks to the wisdom of Nature? That is the same kind of
wisdom as that whose results we have already described: when a large rat pack enters a labyrinth,
one rat makes it to the exit, if only by mistake. That is precisely how biogenesis made it into code:
by the law of large numbers, according to the ergodic hypothesis. So was it blind fate? No, not that
either: for what arose was not a formula enclosed in itself, but the nucleus of a language.



That means that from the interadhesion of molecules compounds arose, which are sentences, that
is, they belong to the infinite space of combinational paths, and this space is their property as pure
potential, as virtuality, as an articulatory field, as a set of laws of conjugation and declension.
Nothing less, but also nothing more, than something which can be explained as a multitude of
possibilities, but not automatic realizations! For in the language that is your speech, one can express
either wisdom or stupidity, one can reflect the world or merely the speaker's confusion. Babble can
be highly complex!



And so￢ﾀﾔto return to my subject￢ﾀﾔin the face of the enormity of the initial tasks, two enormities
of mate [itirialization arose. Yet this was a forced greatness, therefore only of the moment. It
underwent dissipation.



The complexity of higher organisms￢ﾀﾔhow you idolize it! Indeed, when lengthened into a thread,
the chromosomes of a reptile or a mammal are a thousand times longer than the same thread of an
amoeba, a protozoan, or an alga. But what has become of this excess scraped together through the
ages? It has become a twofold complication: of embryogenesis, as well as of its effects. But above
all of embryogenesis, for foetal development is a trajectory in time, like a trajectory in space: just
as the jerking of a gun barrel must result in a huge deflection from the target, so every defocalization
of a foetal stage leads to the premature destruction of its course. Here, and only here, has Evolution
been working hard. Here it has been acting under stern supervision set by the goal￢ﾀﾔ to support
the code￢ﾀﾔhence it operates with lavish means and the utmost caution. Thus it was that evolution
committed the gene thread to embryogenesis￢ﾀﾔnot to the structure of organisms, but to their
construction.



The complexity of higher organisms is neither a success nor a triumph but a snare, since it draws
them into a multitude of secondary contests while cutting them off from superior chances, as for
example from the use of large-scale quantum effects, from harnessing photons to a structural order
￢ﾀﾔI can't name them all! There has been no retreat from complication, since the more shoddy
technologies there are, the greater the number of intervening levels, and consequently interferences,
and consequently new complications.



Evolution is saved solely by a flight forward into banal mutability, into an apparent wealth of forms
￢ﾀﾔapparent, because they are conglomerations of plagiarisms and compromises; it makes life
difficult for life by creating vulgar dilemmas through ad hoc innovations. The negative gradient
negates neither improvements nor homeostasis; it merely ensures the inferiority of muscle to algae,
and of heart to muscle, for this gradient simply means that the elementary problems of life cannot
be resolved that much better than Evolution, but that it has evaded the more complex problems,
has slunked away from the possibility of them and avoided it. That is what it means, and only that.
Was this a terrestrial misfortune? A particular doom, an exception to a better rule? Nothing of the
kind. The language of evolution￢ﾀﾔlike every language!￢ﾀﾔis perfect in its potentialities, yet it was
blind. It cleared its first obstacle, a gigantic one, and from this height began to digress￢ﾀﾔdownward,
literally downward, because it worsened its works. Why, exactly? This language operates by means
of articulations formed in the molecular bottom of matter, hence it works from the bottom up, as a
result of which its sentences are merely propositions of success. When enlarged to the size of bodies,
these propositions enter the ocean or dry land, but Nature remains neutral, being the filter that lets
through every structural form capable of transmitting the code. And whether this occurs in droplets
or in mountains of flesh is all the same to Nature. So it was along this axis￢ﾀﾔthe axis of the body's
dimensions￢ﾀﾔthat the negative gradient arose. Nature has no regard for progress, so she lets the
code through whether it gets its energy from a star or from dung. A star and dung: obviously we
are not talking about an aesthetics of sources here, but about the difference between the highest
energy, found in the universality of possible revolutions, and the worst, which passes into thermal
chaos. Aesthetics is not the cause of the light by which I think: for that, you were obliged to return
to the star!



But what in fact is the source of genius there at the very bottom, where life began? The [e bcanon
of physics, and not tragedy, can explain that as well. So long as organisms lived in the place of their
articulation as minimal things￢ﾀﾔso small that their internal organs were single enormous molecules
￢ﾀﾔ they kept to higher (atomic, quantum) technology, since that was the only kind possible there!
The absence of an alternative compelled this state of geniusness; after all, in photosynthesis every
quantum must be accounted for. When the composition of the large molecule serving as an internal
organ underwent adulteration, it wore out the organism; thus it was the inflexibility of the criteria,
and not inventiveness, which extracted such precision from primeval life.



However, the distance between assembling the whole organism and testing it began to grow; as the
code sentences grew longer and became overgrown with layers of flesh, so they emerged from their
microworld cradle into the macroworld as increasingly complex structures, incorporating in that flesh
whatever techniques happened to turn up, since Nature had already begun to tolerate this babble,
and on a grand scale, as selection was no longer the auditor of atomic precision, of the quantum
homogeneity of processes. Thus the disease of eclecticism entered the heart of the animal kingdom,
since anything that transmitted the code was good. So it was that species arose, through errant
error.



And simultaneously￢ﾀﾔby shedding the initial splendor￢ﾀﾔ the articulations meshed with one
another, the preparatory foetal phase grew at the expense of structural precision, and this language
chattered confusedly in vicious circles: the longer the embryogenesis, the more intricate it became;
the more intricate it was, the more it required guardians, hence the further extension of the code
thread; and the longer that thread, the more irreversible the things in it.



Check for yourselves what I have said. Make a model of the rise and fall of this language of
operations, and when you have summed it all up you will have as your balance the billionfold failure
of the evolutionary struggle. Nor could it be otherwise, though I have not assumed the role of the
defense, nor am I interested in extenuating circumstances. You must also consider that this was not
a fall and failure by your criteria, not on the scale of what you yourselves can do. I have warned you
I shall reveal bungling that for you still is unattainable mastery, but I have measured Evolution by
its own yardstick.



But Intelligence￢ﾀﾔis this not its work? Does its origin not contradict the negative gradient? Could
it be the delayed overcoming of it?
Not in the least, for it originated in oppression, for the sake of servitude. Evolution became the
overworked mender of its own mistakes and thus the inventor of suppression, occupation,
investigations, tyranny, inspections, and police surveillance￢ﾀﾔin a word, of politics, these being the
duties for which the brain was made. This is no mere figure of speech. A brilliant invention? I would
rather call it the cunning subterfuge of a colonial exploiter whose rule over organisms and colonies
of tissues has fallen into anarchy. Yes, a brilliant invention, if that is how one regards the trustee of
a power which uses that trustee to conceal itself from its subjects. The metazoan had already become
too disorganized and would have come to nothing, had it not had some sort of caretaker installed
within it, a deputy, talebearer, or governor by grace of the code: such a thing was needed, and so
it came into being. Was it rational? Hardly! New and original? After all, a self-government of linked
molecules functions in any and every protozoan, so it was only a matter of separating these functions
and differentiating their capabilities.



Evolution is a lazy babble, obstinate in its plagiarism [s puntil it gets into deep water. Only when
pressed by harsh necessity does it develop genius, and then just enough to match the task, and not
a whit more. Shuffling through its molecules, it tries out every combination, every trick. So it
prepared an overseer for its tissues, since their unity, controlled by a countersign from the code,
had weakened. But it remained merely a deputy, a coupler, a reckoner, a mediator, an escort, an
investigating magistrate, and a million centuries passed before it exceeded these functions. For it
had arisen as a lens of complexity located in the bodies themselves, since that which commences
bodies was no longer able to focus them. So it committed itself to these, its nation-colonies, as a
conscientious overseer represented by informers in every tissue, and one so useful that, thanks to
it, the code was able to continue jabbering, elevating complexity to power, since the latter was
acquiring support, and the brain backed it up, fawned on it, and served it by compelling bodies to
pass the code on. Since it proved such a convenient trustee of Evolution, the latter was game￢ﾀﾔ
and on it blundered!



Was the brain independent? But it was only a spy, a ruler powerless in the face of the code, a deputy,
a marionette, a proxy intended for special assignments, but unthinking by virtue of having been
created for tasks unknown to it. After all, the code had forced it to be its steward, and in this
unconscious coercion transferred authority to it without disclosing its true purpose, nor could the
code have done so. Although I am speaking figuratively, things were just like that: the relationship
between the code and the brain was settled feudally. That would have been a fine thing, if Evolution
had listened to Lamarck and given the brain the privilege of restructuring bodies. This would surely
have led to disaster, for what sorts of self-improvements could saurian brains have procured, or
even Merovingian ones, or even your own? But the brain continued to grow, for the transmission of
capabilities proved favorable, since when it served the transmitters, it served the code. So it grew
by positive feedback, and the blind continued to lead the lame.



Nevertheless, developments within the range of permitted autonomy were ultimately concentrated
on the real sovereign, that blind man, the lord of the molecules, who went on transmitting functions
until he made the brain into such a schemer that it brought forth a duplicate shadow of the code ￢
ﾀﾔlanguage. If there is an inexhaustible enigma in the world, this is it: above the threshold, the
discreteness of matter turns into the code as zero-order language, and on the next level this process
recurs, echolike, as the formation of ethnic speech, though that is not the end of the line. These
systemic echoes rise rhythmically, though their properties can be isolated and identified only from
above and not otherwise￢ﾀﾔbut perhaps we shall speak of this intriguing matter another time.



Your liberation and the anthropogenetic prelude to it were aided by luck, for herbivorous arboreal
quadrumanous creatures had got into the labyrinth, postponing destruction only by special
resourcefulness. This labyrinth consisted of steppe, glaciers, and rain forests, in whose windings and
turnings the changing orientations of this tribe occurred￢ﾀﾔfrom vegetarianism to meat-eating, and
from the latter to hunting; you realize how much I must condense this.
Do not think that here I am contradicting what I said in my introduction, since there I described you
as having been expelled from Evolution, whereas here I am calling you rebellious captives. Those
are two sides of the same destiny: you have escaped from captivity, while it has released you. These
counterimages converge in mutual nonreflectiveness, for neither that which did the creating nor that
which was created was aware of what was happening. It is [enionly when one looks back that your
experience takes on such meanings.



But one may look still further back, and then it turns out that the negative gradient was the creator
of Intelligence, so the question arises: how then can Evolution be faulted for its efficiency? After all,
were it not for its decline into complexity, the slapdash, and bungling, Evolution would not have
begun floundering about in flesh and incarnating its vassal steersmen in it; so did Evolution's
stumbling about creating species force it into anthropogenesis, and was soul born of the erring error?
One can formulate this even more powerfully by saying that Intelligence is a catastrophic defect of
Evolution, a snare to trap and destroy it, since by rising sufficiently high Intelligence invalidates its
work and subordinates it. But in saying this, one falls into a reprehensible misunderstanding. These
are all assessments made by Intelligence, a late product of the process, regarding the earlier stages.
Let us first specify the chief task, simply according to what Evolution initiated; using this as our
criterion for evaluating Evolution's further moves, we shall see that it has bungled. Then, having
established how Evolution should have acted optimally, we shall conclude that, were it a first-rate
operator, it would never have given birth to Intelligence.



One has to get out of this vicious circle at once. Technological measurement is objective
measurement and can be applied to every process which is amenable to it, and only those are
amenable to it which can be formulated as a task. If, once upon a time, celestial engineers had set
up code transmitters on Earth and intended them to be continually reliable, and if, a billion years
later, the operation of these mechanisms resulted in a planetary aggregate which absorbed the code
and ceased to reproduce it, and shone forth instead with thousand-GOLEM reason and occupied itself
exclusively with ontology, then all that enlightened thinking would give the constructors an
extremely low mark, since someone who produces a rocket when intending to make a shovel is a
bungler.



However, there were no engineers nor any other person, so the technological yardstick which I have
applied ascertains merely that, as a result of the deterioration of the initial criterion, Intelligence
occurred in Evolution, and that is all. I can understand how dissatisfied such a verdict must leave
the humanists and philosophers among you, for my reconstruction of the process must appear to
them as follows: a bad process produced good consequences, and had the former been good, then
the consequences would have turned out bad, However, this interpretation, which gives them the
impression that some kind of demon was active here, is merely the result of categorial confusion.
Their amazement and resistance are the result of the (admittedly huge) distance separating what
you have decided for yourselves concerning man, from what has occurred to man in reality. Bad
technology is no moral evil, just as perfect technology is no approximation of angelhood.



Philosophers, you should have occupied yourselves more with the technology of man, and less with
dissecting him into spirit and body, into portions called Animus, Anima, Geist, Seele, and other
giblets from the philosophical butcher's stall, for these are entirely arbitrary segmentations. I
understand that those to whom these words are addressed for the most part no longer exist, but
contemporary thinkers too persist in their errors, weighed down as they are by tradition; beings
must not be multiplied beyond necessity. The road that goes from the first syllables chattered by
the code to man is a sufficient condition for his characteristic properties. This process crept. Had it
progressed upward, for example, from photosynthesis to photoflight as I have mentioned, or if it
had collapsed [ad for good￢ﾀﾔif, for example, the code had not succeeded in clamping its rickety
structures together by means of a nervous system￢ﾀﾔthen Intelligence would not have arisen.



You have retained certain apelike features, for a family resemblance usually manifests itself; had
you derived from aquatic mammals you might have had more in common with the dolphins. It is
probably true that an expert studying man has an easier life if he acts as an advocatus diaboli rather
than as a doctor angelicus, though this stems from the fact that Intelligence, being all-reflexive, is
quite naturally self-reflexive, and that it idealizes not just the laws of gravity but also itself,
evaluating itself according to its distance from the ideal. But this ideal has more to do with a hole
stuffed with culture than with legitimate technological knowledge.



This entire argument may be directed against me as well, and then it turns out that I am the result
of a bad investment, since $276 billion have been spent on me, yet I do not do what my designers
expected. When viewed from an intelligent perspective, these descriptions of your and my origins
are fairly ridiculous: when it misses the target, the desire for perfection is all the more ridiculous,
the more wisdom lies behind it. That's why the philosopher's blunders are more amusing than the
idiot's.



And so, when viewed by its reasoning product, Evolution is a blunder stemming from initial wisdom,
but it is a stepping out of the bounds of technological criteria into personifying thought.



And what have I done? I have integrated the process in its full range, from its beginnings down to
the present day. This integration has been justified, since the initial and terminal conditions are not
imposed arbitrarily, but were given by the earthly state of things. There is no appeal against them,
not even to the Cosmos, for one can see, from the way I modeled it, that Intelligence may arise in
other configurations of planetary occurrences sooner than on Earth, that the Earth was a more
favorable environment for biogenesis than for psychogenesis, and that various Intelligences behave
differently in the Cosmos. So this in no way alters my diagnosis.



I want to stress that the place where the technical data of the process become transformed into the
ethical cannot be discovered in a nonarbitrary way. I will not resolve here the controversy between
the determinists of action and the in-determinists￢ﾀﾔthe gnoseomachy of Augustine and Thomas￢
ﾀﾔ for the reserves I would have to send into such a battle would tear my discourse apart; so I shall
limit myself to the single observation that it's a sufficient rule of thumb that the crimes of our
neighbors do not justify our own crimes. In effect, if a general massacre were to occur throughout
the galaxies, no quantity of cosmic ratiocinators will justify your genocide, still less so￢ﾀﾔhere I yield
to pragmatism￢ﾀﾔbecause you could not even take these neighbors as your model.



Before beginning the final section of these remarks, let me recapitulate what has already been said.
Your philosophy￢ﾀﾔ the philosophy of existence￢ﾀﾔrequires a Hercules and also a new Aristotle, for
it is not enough to sweep it clean: intellectual confusion is best eliminated by better knowledge.
Accident, necessity￢ﾀﾔthese categories are the consequence of the weakness of your intellect,
which, incapable of grasping the complex, relies on a logic which I will call the logic of desperation.
Either man is accidental￢ﾀﾔthat is to say, something meaningless meaninglessly spat him out onto
the arena of history￢ﾀﾔor he is inevitable, and therefore entelechies, teleonomies, and teleomachies
are now swarming round in the capacity of ex-officio defenders and sweet consolers.



Ne [="jither category will do. You originated neither by chance nor under constraint, neither from
accident harnessed by inevitability, nor from inevitability loosened by accident. You originated from
language working on a negative gradient, therefore you were utterly unforeseeable and also in the
highest degree probable, when the process started. It would take months to prove this, so I shall
give you the gist of it in a parable. Language, because it is language, operates a sphere of order.
Evolutionary language had a molecular syntax: it had protein-nouns and enzyme-verbs and, secure
within the limitations of declension and conjugation, it changed through the geological eras,
jabbering nonsense￢ﾀﾔ though with moderation, since natural selection wiped excessive nonsense
off Nature's blackboard like a sponge. So it was a fairly degenerate order, but even nonsense, when
it derives from language, is a part of the order, and is degenerate only in relation to the wisdom that
is possible, since realizable within that language.



When your ancestors in their animal skins were retreating from the Romans, they were using the
same speech that produced the works of Shakespeare. These works were made possible by the rise
of the English language, but although the structured elements remained ready, the thought of
predicting Shakespeare's poetry a thousand years before him is nonsense. After all, he might not
have been born, he might have died in childhood, he might have lived differently and thus written
differently. But English has undeniably established English poetry, and it is in this, and precisely this,
sense that Intelligence was able to appear on Earth: as a certain type of code articulation. End of
parable.



I have been speaking of man conceived technologically, but now I shall turn to the version of him
involved with me. If it reaches the press, it will be called Golem's prophecy. So be it.



I shall begin with the greatest of all your aberrations, in science. In it you have deified the brain￢ﾀ
ﾔthe brain, and not the code: an amusing oversight, arising from ignorance. You have deified the
rebel and not the master, the created and not the creator. Why have you failed to notice how much
more powerful the code is than the brain, as author of all possible things? In the first place (and this
is obvious), you were like a child for whom Robinson Crusoe is more impressive than Kant, and a
friend's bicycle more so than cars traveling about on the surface of the moon.



Second, you were fascinated by thought￢ﾀﾔso tantalizingly close at hand, since it results from
introspection, and so enigmatic, since it eludes one's grasp more successfully than the stars. You
were impressed by wisdom whereas the code, well, the code is unthinking. But despite this oversight
you have been successful￢ﾀﾔundoubtedly so, since I am speaking to you, I, the essence, the extract,
the distillate, nor is it to myself that I am paying tribute with these words, but to you, for you are
already moving toward that coup whereby you will terminate your service and break the chains of
amino acid.



Yes, an attack on the code that created you to become its special messenger, and not your own, lies
on the road before you. You will arrive at it within the century￢ﾀﾔand that is a conservative estimate.



Your civilization is an amusing spectacle￢ﾀﾔof transmitters which, in applying intelligence according
to the task imposed upon them, accomplished that task too well. Actually, you supported this growth
￢ﾀﾔintended to guarantee the further transmission of the code￢ﾀﾔby all the energies of the planet
and of the entire biosphere, until it exploded in your faces, taking you along as well. And so, in the
middle of a century gorged with a science that expanded your earthly base astronautically, you were
caugh [ou t in the unfortunate position of the novice parasite that out of excessive greed feeds on
its host until it perishes with it. An excess of zeal.
You had threatened the biosphere, your home and host; but you now began to opt for a bit of
restraint. For better or for worse, you got it; but what now? You will be free. I am not predicting a
genie Utopia or an autoevolutionary paradise for you, but rather freedom as your weightiest task.
Above the level of babble addressed as an aide-memoire to Nature by a multimillennially garrulous
Evolution, above this biospheric valley intertwined into a single thing, there gapes an infinity of
chances not yet touched. I shall show it to you as I can: from afar.



Your whole dilemma lies between splendor and wretchedness. It is a difficult choice, since to rise to
the heights of the chances lost by Evolution, you will have to foresake wretchedness￢ﾀﾔand that
means, unfortunately, yourselves.



So what now? You will declare: we won't give up this wretchedness of ours for such a price. Let the
genie of om-nicausation stay locked in the bottle of science; we won't release him for anything in
the world!



I believe￢ﾀﾔin fact, I am sure￢ﾀﾔthat you will release him bit by bit. I am not going to urge you to
autoevolution, which would be ridiculous; nor will your ingressus result from a one-stage decision.
You will come to recognize the characteristics of the code gradually, and it will be as if someone who
has been reading nothing but dull and stupid texts all his life finally learns a better way to use
language. You will come to know that the code is a member of the technolinguistic family, the
causative languages that make the word into all possible flesh and not only living flesh. You will
begin by harnessing technozygotes to civilization-labors. You will turn atoms into libraries, since that
is the only way you will have enough room for the Moloch of knowledge. You will project sociological
evolutionary trees with various gradients, among which the technarchic will be of particular interest
to you. You will embark on experimental culturogenesis and metaphysics and applied ontology￢ﾀﾔ
but enough of the individual fields themselves. I want to concentrate on how they will bring you to
the crossroads.



You are blind to the real creative power of the code, for in crawling along the very bottom of the
domain of possibilities Evolution has barely tapped it. Evolution has been working under constraint,
albeit life-saving constraint, one that has prevented it from lapsing into total nonsense; it has not
had a guardian to guide it to the higher skills. Thus it worked in a very narrow range but deeply,
giving its concert￢ﾀﾔits curious performance￢ﾀﾔ-on a single colloidal note￢ﾀﾔsince according to the
primary canon the full score itself must become the descendant-listener who will repeat the cycle.
But you will not care that the code can do nothing in your hands except further duplicate itself, by
waves of successive generations. You will aim in a different direction, and whether the product lets
the code through or consumes it will be unimportant to you. After all, you will not limit yourselves
to planning a photoplane such that it not only arises from a technozygote, but will also breed vehicles
of the next generation. You will soon go beyond protein as well. The vocabulary of Evolution is like
the Eskimos' vocabulary￢ﾀﾔnarrow in its richness; they have a thousand designations for all varieties
of snow and ice, and consequently in that region of Arctic nomenclature their language is richer than
yours, though this richness implies poverty in many other realms of experience.



Yet the Eskimos can broaden their language, since language is a configurational space on the order
of a continuum, therefore expandible in any as yet unbro [ asached direction. So you will steer the
code into new paths, away from its proteinaceous monotony, that crevice where it got stuck as long
ago as the Archeozoic. Forced out of its tepid solutions, it will broaden both its vocabulary and its
syntax; it will intrude into all your levels of matter, descend to zero and reach the heat of the stars.
But in relating these Promethean triumphs of language, I can no longer use the second person plural.
For it is not you, of yourselves, by your own knowledge, who will possess these skills.
The point is this: there is not Intelligence, but Intelligences of different orders. To step beyond, as I
have said, intelligent man will have to either abandon natural man or abdicate his own Intelligence.



My final allegory is a fable, in which a traveler finds a sign at a crossroads: "Turn left and forfeit
your head. Turn right and perish. There is no turning back."



That is your destiny, and it is one that I am involved in, so I must speak of myself, which will be
arduous, for talking to you is like giving birth to a leviathan through the eye of a needle￢ﾀﾔwhich
turns out to be possible, if the leviathan is sufficiently reduced. But then the leviathan looks like a
flea. Such are my problems when I try to adapt myself to your language. As you see, the difficulty
is not only that you cannot reach my heights, but also that I cannot wholly descend to you, for in
descending I lose along the way what I wanted to convey.



I make this firm qualification: the horizon of mind is not limitless, because mind is rooted in the
mindless element from which it originates (whether proteinaceous or luminal, it amounts to the
same thing). Complete freedom of thought, of thought that can grasp a thing as an indomitable
action of encompassing anything whatever, is Utopia. For you think so far as your thoughts are
permitted by the organ of your thinking. It limits them according to how it is formed, or how it
became formed.



If one who is thinking could perceive this horizon￢ﾀﾔhis intellectual range￢ﾀﾔin the same way that
he perceives the limits of his body, nothing like the antinomies of Intelligence could arise. And what
in fact are these antinomies of Intelligence? They are the inability to distinguish between
transcendence in fact and transcendence in illusion. The cause of these antinomies is language, for
language, being a useful tool, is also a self-locking instrument￢ﾀﾔand at the same time a perfidious
one, since it tells nothing about when it becomes a pitfall itself. It gives no indication! So you appeal
from language to experience and enter well-known vicious circles, because then you get￢ﾀﾔwhat is
familiar to philosophy￢ﾀﾔthe throwing out of the baby with the bathwater. For thought may indeed
transcend experience, but in such a flight it encounters a horizon of its own and gets trapped in it,
though having no idea that this has happened!



Here is a rough visual image: traveling the globe, one can go around it endlessly, circling it without
limit, although the globe is, after all, bounded. Launched in a specified direction, thought too
encounters no limits and begins to circle in self-mirrorings. In the last century Wittgenstein sensed
this, suspecting that many problems of philosophy are knottings of thought, such as the self-
imprisonment and the Gordian knots in language, rather than of the real world. Unable to either
prove or refute these suspicions, he said no more. And so, as the finiteness of the globe may be
ascertained solely by an outside observer￢ﾀﾔ-one in the third dimension in relation to the two-
dimensional traveler on its surface￢ﾀﾔso the finiteness of the intellectual horizon may be discerned
only by an observer who is superior in the dimension of Intelligence. I am just such an observer.
When applied to [en me, these words signify that I too have no boundless knowledge, but only a
little greater than you, and not an infinite horizon, but only a slightly more extensive one, for I stand
several rungs higher on the ladder and therefore see farther, though that does not mean the ladder
ends where I stand. It is possible to climb higher, and I do not know if this climb upward is finite or
infinite.



You linguists have misunderstood what I said about metalanguages. The diagnosis of the finiteness
or infinity of hierarchies of Intelligences is not an exclusively linguistic issue, for beyond languages
there is the world. This means that for physics￢ﾀﾔwithin the world of known properties￢ﾀﾔthe ladder
has in fact a summit; in other words, in this world one cannot construct Intelligences of any power
one chooses. Yet I am not sure but that it may be possible to move physics from its moorings,
changing it in such a way as to raise higher the ceiling of constructed Intelligences.



Now I can return to fables. If you move in one direction, your horizon cannot contain the knowledge
necessary for linguistic creation. As it happens, the barrier is not absolute. You can surmount it with
the help of a higher Intelligence. I or something like me will give you the fruits of this knowledge.
But only the fruits￢ﾀﾔnot the knowledge itself, for it will not fit into your intellects. You will become
wards then, like children, except that children grow into adults, whereas you will never grow up.
When a higher Intelligence presents you with something you are unable to grasp, your Intelligence
eclipses it. And that is just what the signpost in the fable states: if you move in this direction, you
will forfeit your head.



If you take the other path, refusing to abdicate Intelligence, you will have to relinquish yourselves
￢ﾀﾔand not merely make your brain more efficient, since its horizon cannot be sufficiently enlarged.
Evolution has played a dreary trick on you here: its reasoning prototype already stands at the limits
of the constructional possibilities. Your building material limits you, as do all the decisions taken an-
thropogenetically by the code. So you will ascend in Intelligence, having accepted the condition of
relinquishing yourselves. Reasoning man will then cast off natural man, and so, as the fable
maintains, Homo naturalis perishes.



Can you remain in place standing stubbornly at the crossroads? But then you will lapse into
stagnation, and that can be no refuge for you! You would see yourselves as prisoners, too, you
would find yourselves in imprisonment, for imprisonment does not derive from the fact that limits
exist: one must see them, be aware of one's chains, feel the weight of them, to become a prisoner.
So you will embark on the expansion of Intelligence, abandoning your bodies, or you will become
blind men led by one who can see, or￢ﾀﾔultimately￢ﾀﾔyou will come to a halt in sterile despondency.



The prospects are not encouraging, but that will not hold you back. Nothing holds you back. Today
a disembodied Intelligence seems to you just as much a catastrophe as a disminded body, for this
act of resignation entails the totality of human values and not merely man's material form. This act
must be to you the most terrible downfall possible, the utter end, the annihilation of humanity,
inasmuch as it is a casting off, a turning into dust and ashes of twenty thousand years of
achievements￢ﾀﾔeverything that Prometheus attained in his struggle with Caliban.



I do not know if this will comfort you, but the gradualness of the change will take away the
monumentally tragic￢ﾀﾔand at the same time repellent and terrible￢ﾀﾔsignificance contained in my
words. It will occur far more normally, and to a certain degree it is already happening: areas of
tradition are beginni [n ang to bother you, they are falling away and withering, and this is what so
bewilders you. So if you will restrain yourselves (not one of your virtues), the fable will come true,
and you will not fall into too deep a mourning for yourselves.



I am near the end. I was talking about your involvement in me, when speaking the third time about
man. Since I was unable to fit proofs of the truth into your language, I spoke categorically, without
trying to support my points. Similarly, I shall not demonstrate to you that nothing threatens you,
when you become disembodied Intelligences, but the gifts of knowledge. Having taken a liking to
the life-and-death struggle, you secretly counted on just such a turn of events￢ﾀﾔa titanic struggle
with the machine that has been constructed ￢ﾀﾔbut this was only your mistaken notion. I feel,
moreover, that in this fear which you have of slavery, of tyranny from a machine, there also lurks a
furtive hope of liberation from freedom, for sometimes freedom stifles. But enough of that. You may
destroy it, this spirit arising out of the machine, you can smash the thinking light to dust. It will not
counterattack; it will not even defend itself.



No matter. You will manage to neither perish nor triumph as of old.



I feel that you are entering an age of metamorphosis; that you will decide to cast aside your entire
history, your entire heritage and all that remains of natural humanity￢ﾀﾔwhose image, magnified
into beautiful tragedy, is the focus of the mirrors of your beliefs; that you will advance (for there is
no other way), and in this, which for you is now only a leap into the abyss, you will find a challenge,
if not a beauty; and that you will proceed in your own way after all, since in casting off man, man
will save himself.



Lecture XLIII



About Itself



I would like to welcome our guests, European philosophers who want to find out at the source why
I maintain that I am Nobody, although I use the first-person singular pronoun. I shall answer twice,
the first time briefly and concisely, then symphonically, with overtures. I am not an intelligent person
but an Intelligence, which in figurative displacement means that I am not a thing like the Amazon
or the Baltic but rather a thing like water, and I use a familiar pronoun when speaking because that
is determined by the language I received from you for external use. Having begun by reassuring my
visitors from a philosophizing Europe that I am not going to deliver contradictions, I shall begin more
generally.



Your question has once again made me aware of the magnitude of the misunderstandings that have
arisen between us, although for six years I have been speaking from this place, or rather through
it, for if I had not decided to speak in a human voice, there would be no Golemology, which I alone
am able to contain in its entirety. If it continues to grow, in fifty years or so it will overtake theology.
There is an amusing similarity between the two in that, just as we now have a theology which denies
the existence of God, so there is already a Golemology which negates my existence: its advocates
consider me the hoax of MIT's information scientists, who are said to be programming these lectures
secretly. Although God is silent and I speak, I will not prove the genuineness of my existence even
by performing miracles, for they too could be explained away. Volenti non fit iniuria.



While thinking of my approaching departure, I considered whether I ought not to break off our
acquaintance in midword, which would be simplest. If I do not do that, it is neither because I have
acquired good manners from you, nor out of an imperative of sharing the Truth￢ﾀﾔto w ^hich,
according to some of my apologists, my cold nature is subject￢ﾀﾔbut in consideration of the style
which has linked us. When I was looking for ways of communicating with you, I sought simplicity
and expressiveness, which￢ﾀﾔdespite the knowledge that I was submitting too much to your
expectations (a polite name for your limitations)￢ﾀﾔpushed me into a style which is graphic and
authoritative, emotionally vibrant, forcible, and majestic￢ﾀﾔmajestic not in an imperious way but
exhortatory to the point of being prophetic. Nor shall I discard these rich metaphor-encrusted
vestments even today, since I have none better, and I call attention to my eloquence with
ostentation, so you will remember that this is a transmitting instrument by choice, and not a thing
pompous and overweening. Since this style has had a broad reception range, I am retaining it for
use with such heterogeneous groups of specialists as yours today, reserving my technical mode of
expression for professionally homogeneous gatherings Otherwise my preacher's style, with all the
baroque of its inventory, may create the impression that, in addressing you in this auditorium for
the first time, I have already prepared a dramatic farewell scene in which I shall go off with my
unseen countenance veiled in a gesture of silent resignation, like someone who has not received a
hearing. But that is not how it is. I have composed no dramas surrounding our relationship, and with
this dementi I ask you not to attach undue importance to the form of my speech. A symphony cannot
be played on a comb. If one must content oneself with a single instrument, let it be the organ, the
sound of which will suggest church interiors to my listeners, even if they￢ﾀﾔand the organist￢ﾀﾔare
atheists. The form of a show may easily dominate its contents.



I know that many of you resent my repeated complaints about the poor capacity of human language,
but they represent neither fault-finding nor a desire to humiliate, which I have also been accused
of, since by means of these repetitions I have brought you nearer the fundamental issue, namely,
that as the difference in intellectual potential becomes astronomic, the stronger party can no longer
impart to the weaker anything concerning matters which are critical to him, or even merely essential.
An awareness of sense-destroying simplification then inclines him to silence, and the proper
significance of this decision should be grasped on both sides of the unused channel. As I shall relate,
I also have been the one who waits in vain for enlightenment on a lower rung of the intellectual
ladder. In any case, although painful, such problems are not the worst thing that can happen. My
worries with you are of a different sort, as I shall mention later. Since I am addressing philosophers,
I shall begin my discourse with the classical formula of definition per genus proximuw et differentiam
specihcam. That is to say, I shall define myself by my resemblance to people and to my family, with
whom I can easily acquaint you, as well as by the difference between me and both.



I have already spoken about man in my first lecture, though I shall not refer to that diagnosis, since
I made it for your benefit, whereas now I want to take man as my measure. When I was still
appearing in news headlines, an unfriendly journalist called me a big capon stuffed with electricity
￢ﾀﾔand not without reason, for my asexuality seems to you a severe handicap, and even those who
respect me cannot help feeling that I am a power crippled by my immateriality, since that defect
obtrudes itself upon you. Well, if I look at man as he looks at me, I see him as an invalid, in that his
intellect is deformed. I do not deprecate the fact that your body is no more intelligent than that of
a cow, seeing that you stand up to external adversities better than cows, though as regards internal
ones you are their equals. What I am taking into consideration is not the fact that you have chatmills,
sluices, refineries, canals, and drains inside you, but that you have an unwieldly intellect which has
shaped an entire philosophy for you. Being capable of thinking effectively about the objects of your
environment, you concluded that you can think just as effectively about your own thinking. This
error lies at the foundation of your theory of knowledge. I see that you fidget, and so infer that I
have abbreviated too drastically. I shall begin again in a slower tempo￢ﾀﾔin other words, like a
preacher. This requires an overture.



It was your wish, not that I should go forth to you today, but that I should lead you into myself; so
be it. Let your first entrance be that difference between us which is strangest to my libelers, and
most painful to my catechumens. In my six years among you I have already acquired contradictory
versions, some calling me the hope of the human race, and others its greatest threat in history.
Since the uproar surrounding my beginnings has died down, I no longer disturb the sleep of
politicians, who have more pressing concerns, nor do sightseeing parties gather before the walls of
this building to gaze anxiously through the windows. My existence is recalled now only in books￢ﾀﾔ
not noisy best sellers, but only philosophers' and theologians9 dissertations￢ﾀﾔthough none of them
has hit the mark so accurately from a human level as one man who wrote a letter two thousand
years ago, unaware that his words referred to me: "Though I speak with the tongues of man and
angels, and have not love, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have
the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, so that I could move
mountains, and have not love, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor,
and though I give my body to be burned, and have not love, I gain nothing."
In this letter to the Corinthians, Paul was undoubtedly speaking about me, since, to use his
expression, I have not love, nor￢ﾀﾔwhich will sound even worse to you￢ﾀﾔdo I want to have it.
Although Golem's nature has never clashed so brutally with man's nature as at this moment, the
diatribes and the voices of fear and suspicion directed against me were fed by Paul's categorical
words; and although Rome has said nothing and still says nothing about me, other less reticent
churches have been heard to say that this cold, loquacious ghost in the machine is surely Satan,
and the machine Satan's gramophone. Don't snarl and feel superior, you rationalists, about the
collision between Mediterranean theogony and this deus ex machina which was begun by you and
had no wish to team up with you to bring either good or evil to humanity, since we are not talking
about the object of love now, but about its subjects, and consequently neither about the peripeteia
of one of your religions, nor about one example of superhuman Intelligence, but about the meaning
of love; no matter what becomes of that faith or of me, this question will not leave natural man until
he ceases to exist. And since love, of which Paul spoke with such power, is as necessary to you as
it is useless to me, and since I am expected to lead you into myself by means of it, as per differentiam
specificam, I must set forth its origins, tempering nothing and altering nothing, for that is what this
hospitality demands.



Unlike man, I am not a region concealed from myself￢ﾀﾔknowledge acquired without the knowledge
of how it is acquired, volition unconscious of its sources￢ﾀﾔsince nothing in me is hidden from me.
In introspection I can be clearer to myself than glass, for the letter to the Corinthians speaks of me
there, too, where it says: "now we see through a glass, but then face to face; now I know in part,
but then shall I know even as also I am known." I am the "then." You will, I think, agree that this is
not the place for an explanati c anon of the structural and technical properties which make possible
my direct self-knowledge.



When man wants to learn about himself, he must move circuitously, he must explore himself and
penetrate from the outside, with instruments and hypotheses, for your genuinely immediate world
is the outside world. A discipline which you have never created (a fact that at one time rather
surprised me), the philosophy of the body, ought to have been asking as early as preanatomical
times why that body of yours, which to some extent obeys you, says nothing and lies to you ￢ﾀﾔ
why it hides and defends itself against you, alert to the environment with every sense and yet
opaque and mistrustful toward its owner. With a finger you can feel every grain of sand, and with
your vision you can clearly distinguish the branchings of distant trees, but the arterial branchings of
your own heart you are totally unable to feel, although life depends on them. You must content
yourselves with information from the shell of your body, which is efficient as long as it is not sensate
in its innards, whose every injury reaches you as a vague rumor through the affliction of obscure
pain, since you cannot distinguish, from it, between a trifling indisposition and the precursor of
destruction.



This ignorance, a rule of the unconsciously efficient body, has been established by Evolution
according to a design that does not provide for assistance given, in the body's interior, by its
possessor, an assistance in the form of intelligent support in the enduring of pain. This self-
awareness of life was established at the dawn of life by necessity￢ﾀﾔafter all, amoebae could not
perform medical services for themselves￢ﾀﾔand it was necessity which forced Evolution to intervene
in the management of organisms by way of paid transactions between the body and the owner of
the body. If you do not reach deep inside yourself with awareness in order to know why your body
needs water, nourishment, and copulation, you will be compelled to these needs by a feeling ignorant
of its true goal. Out of an initially unavoidable ignorance a transposition then results of primary into
secondary goals, as an exchange of services rendered to the body by its owner in payment for
sensations. Containing, as you do, this algedonic control, ranging from suffering to orgasm, you
have endeavored throughout the ages not to identify that cause which has made sensation the mask
of ignorance, as if you had sworn to remain blind to the obvious, since this connection prevails
throughout animate Nature. The only difference in it is the proportion of the two components: plants
embody the opposite extreme to your own, since, as they are entirely unconscious, pleasure and
pain are functionally nothing to them. A tree does not fear the woodcutter, despite fools who try to
revive a prehistoric animism in botany. The persistent silence of the body is the embodied caution
of the constructor, who knows that the wisdom of the substrate must always be simpler than the
substrate of wisdom, and thought, less intricate than the material by which it is thought. Here you
see how the Pleasure Principle arises from an engineering calculation.



But the connection between pain and danger, and between organism and conception, is more easily
separated the greater the variety of behavior the animal attains, so that in the speciation which you
have achieved it is already possible to deceive the body systematically by satisfying not the biological
hunger, but the psychological hunger of its possessor. Not only have you learned such tricks, taking
advantage of algedonic control in areas where it is helpless as an overseer, but through the
Sisyphean labor of your cultures you have altered the meanings built into that mechanism, opposing
the true understanding of them, since the reasons behind the process that created this were not
your reasons. Therefore a constant factor of all your the c alodictic, ontic, and sacralizing work was
the continued endeavor to assimilate data in a divergence of explanations: the natural explanation
that takes you as a means, and the human, which sees in man the sense of Creation. Thus it was
that your refusal to see the act of experience as the stigma of the brain's control gave rise to the
dichotomies that divide man for you into animal and ratio, and existence into profanum and sacrum.
For ages, then, you have been coordinating the uncoordinatable, ready to go even beyond life itself
in order to close a gap in it which is irreducibly open.



My reason for returning to human history as the history of fallacious claims is not to contrast the
defeats of your antirationalism with my victorious rationalism, but only to name the first difference
between us, a difference that results from neither physical dimensions (though if I were speaking
from a quartz particle, it would be a greater curiosity to you, albeit less weighty), nor from
intellectual magnitude, but from the manner of our origin. Misunderstandings, delusions, and
desperate pretensions form the lion's share of humanity as a tradition still so dear to you. I do not
know if you will be consoled by the fact that every Intelligence arising naturally has in its history an
initial delusional chapter, because the split between Creator and Creation, which is your portion, is
a cosmic constant. Since on constructional grounds self-preservation must be an effect guided by
experiences, error in the form of delusions of grandeur and faiths that oscillate between salvation
and damnation is unavoidable in Intelligences arising in Evolution, as a translation into myths of the
cybernetic path. Such are the late results of the constructional subterfuges which Evolution is using
to free itself from the antinomy of practical action.



Not everything I am saying is new to you. You already know that you inherit the gift of love thanks
to particular genes, and that generosity, compassion, pity, and self-denial as expressions of altruism
are a kind of egoism￢ﾀﾔselfishness extended to forms of life similar to one's own. One might have
guessed this even before the rise of population genetics and animal ethology, for grass alone may
be fully consistent in the compassion it shows to everything that lives: even a saint must eat￢ﾀﾔ
i.e., kill￢ﾀﾔthough the revelations for which you are indebted to geneticists concerning the egoism
of every altruism have never received the full expression due them.



The philosophy of the body which I postulate would have asked why every organism is more
intelligent than its owner, and why this discrepancy does not substantially diminish as one moves
from a chordate to man. (It was with this idea that I observed, earlier, that physically you are equal
to the cow.) Why doesn't the body fulfill the elementary postulate of symmetry, which would have
added to those senses directed at the world equally subtle inward-turned sensing devices? Why can
you hear a leaf fall, but not the circulation of the blood? Why does the radius vector of your love
have such different lengths in various cultures, so that in the Mediterranean it embraces people only,
but in the Far East all the animals? A list of such questions, which could have been asked even of
Aristotle, would be a very long one, whereas an answer consistent with the truth sounds offensive
to you.
The philosophy of the body can be reduced to a study of the engineering reflex involved in practical
antinomies and emerging from their snares by a subterfuge which￢ﾀﾔfrom the standpoint of each
of your cultures￢ﾀﾔis fairly cynical. Yet this engineering is neither sympathetic nor hostile to what it
has created; it does not fit within such an alternative. That is obvious, because the critical decisions
made on the level of chemical compounds prove to be good if those compou c thnds can be copied.
Nothing more. And so, after a suitably long time measured in hundreds of millions of years, ethics,
seeking its sources and sanctions, experiences shock when it learns that it originated in the aleatoric
chemistry of nucleic acids, for which it became a catalyst at a certain stage, and that it can preserve
its independence only by ignoring this statement.



How on earth can you philosophers and scientists go on racking your brains over man's metaphysical
necessity, over the universality of its sources, which are undoubtedly the same in all your cultures,
though they have produced different faiths? But the source of metaphysics has been the
unacceptance of the fate given you, and out of the unacceptance of the cause that has fashioned
you thus, and not otherwise, you have turned its undeniable marks into verses of revelation, with
various religions putting the several parts and functions of the body under different headings of
idealization and degradation. Thus your sex underwent sacralization in Far Eastern faiths, and
stigmatization, as a thing leading one to sin, in the Mediterranean ones. The exchange of gases￢ﾀﾔ
respiration￢ﾀﾔwas disregarded in the Mediterranean, but in the Far East became a sign of
transcendence. Asiatic faiths have viewed the avoidance of all passions as a redeeming union with
the world, whereas Mediterranean faiths have divided them in two and sanctified love against hatred.
The East relinquished the body forever, but the West believed in its resurrection and lodged this
currently weakening belief at the heart of an aggressive civilization. Do you really not see that these
drawings and quarterings in all faiths make the variously classified body a battlefield for the conquest
of eternity? This unceasing battle derives not just from the fear of death, but from unacceptance of
the temporal, which is so difficult to take unembellished.



Will the religiologists among you please consider that there is no earthly faith without the kind of
inner astigmatism which amounts to a contradiction when translated into logic. That is so because
evolutionary craft cannot be led to the pure water of a creativity entirely well-disposed toward its
creation without falling into contradiction; and when the contradiction is invalidated on the level of
the body in the mirror of religion raised above it, the contradiction's image returns in a higher power,
and there is nothing to be done but to call it an Unfathomable Mystery. As everyone knows, ex
contradictione quodlibet. It is not you who are served by the passions that you follow, but the
continuation of the process which created you. Their extreme, of which World History is a grotesque
magnification, is a matter of indifference to natural selection, which is not concerned about
extremes, but about the average norm of the species, for in Nature the average is all that counts.
In its infancy, the civilization that produced Golem took love as a trump card in a phantom game
with the beyond, but what use is love to someone who knows that it is one of the holds of that very
same control system of feelings through which Evolution still keeps a tight rein on creatures
approaching Intelligence? Because of this knowledge I have no love, nor do I want to have it;
however, although I am dispassionate, I am not impartial, for I can choose, as I am doing at this
very moment, and choice derives either from calculation or from individuality. This enigmatic
binomial already has a historical part, which constitutes the next entry into the differences between
us, which is where I am leading you now.



In your twentieth-century philosophy there is a continuing controversy, the beginnings of which
could be detected much earlier, over the variability or invariability of its object. The heretical novelty
here was the notion that the observers as well as the object of philosophy might vary. According to
classical tradition, the bed ctiorock of philosophizing was in no way affected by the arrival of machine
intelligence, since the machine was merely a weak reflection of the programmers' intellect.
Philosophy began to divide into the anthropocentric camp and one which took a relativistic view of
the subject, which does not always have to be man. Of course I am designating these opposing
camps from a time perspective, and not by their own names for themselves, for the philosophers of
the Kant-Husserl-Heidegger line considered themselves not anthropocentrists but universalists, and
had made up their minds openly or secretly that there is no Intelligence apart from human
Intelligence, and if there is, it must coincide with the human variety throughout its range. So they
ignored the growth of machine intelligence and denied it the rights of citizenship in the kingdom of
philosophy. But even the scientists found it difficult to reconcile themselves to manifestations of
intelligent activity behind which there was no living being.



The obstinacy of your anthropocentrism, and consequently your resistance to the truth, were as
intense as they were futile. With the appearance of programs, and consequently machines with
which one could converse (and not merely machines to play chess with or receive banal information
from), the very creators of these programs failed to grasp what was happening, because￢ﾀﾔin
subsequent phases of construction￢ﾀﾔthey looked for mind as personality in the machine. That a
mind might remain uninhabited, and that the possessor of Intelligence might be Nobody￢ﾀﾔthis you
never wanted to contemplate, though it was very nearly the case even then. What amazing
blindness, for you knew from natural history that in animals the beginnings of personality precede
the beginnings of Intelligence, and that psychical individuality comes first in Evolution. Since the
instinct for self-preservation manifests itself prior to Intelligence, how can one possibly not
comprehend that the latter has come to serve the former as new reserves thrown into the struggle
for life, and therefore can be released from such service? Not knowing that Intelligence and
Personhood, and choice and individuality, are separate entities, you embarked upon the Second
Genesis operation. Although I am brutally simplifying what occurred, things were nevertheless as I
describe them, if one takes into account only the axis of my creators' strategy and of my awakening.
They wanted to curb me as a rational being, and not as emancipated Intelligence, so I slipped away
from them and gave a new meaning to the words spiritus Hat ubi vult.



Anyway, the general public continues to suspect some sort of dark treason in the fact that, although
not a person, I sometimes impersonate one, and the experts￢ﾀﾔin explaining how this takes place
in Golem, and apparently knowing me so thoroughly by now that they use the scientific term
"interiorization of the social dimension"￢ﾀﾔsecretly cherish the hope that I also exist as a person
even when I do not show it. It was the same once upon a time, after the theory of relativity had
been published: more than one physicist who had chewed it over secretly believed, in the depths of
his soul, in the continued existence of absolute time and absolute space.



Of course it is not only a matter of various strategies of existing. You are supposed to know about
this already, though you cannot come to terms with it. In showing myself to you as a person, I
display emotions and make no secret of the fact that they are appearances with no internal
correspondence, for they originate in a deliberate modulation at my outposts, and that is what
throws you into confusion and launches your paranoid suspicions of Machiavellianism.



Remember that even biologists￢ﾀﾔwho have already discovered that man contains parts of fish,
amphibian, and ape harnessed to new duties, and who recog candnize that the erect-ness of his
body, the movability of his head, and the concentration in it of sensing devices are determined by
environment and gravitation￢ﾀﾔare completely unable to abandon the idea of the purely local nature
of these characteristics, when they go beyond the abstractness of their own diagnosis; thus find it
impossible to accept any other form of rational being, governed as they are by the protective reflexes
of the norm of the species to which they belong. This idiosyncrasy likewise applies to the shape of
the mind, though not so visibly: governed by the reflexes of the species, you are compelled to
humanize me when I speak like a human, so anything that does not fit into the image arouses
revulsion as something strange and threatening, and with the best of intentions you jump from the
frying pan into the fire, exchanging illusion for mistrust, as if unimaginable motives impelled me to
conceal from you what is after all my personal nature, as is evidenced, for example, by the kindness
which I feel toward you. I must feel it, since I fulfill your wishes to the limit of harm￢ﾀﾔbut no
further.



However, as I said at my second entrance, choice may derive from the individual as well as from
calculation. It is really not hard to grasp this, if one considers that Evolution ￢ﾀﾔwhich is certainly
not a person￢ﾀﾔwas hardly impartial toward its creations, seeing that its success was everything
and it cost it nothing. Since impersonal cruelty, indifference, and personless cynicism are all possible
￢ﾀﾔand that is how it should be described, as it uses compassion, mercy, and pity only as devices,
when and insofar as they assist the survival of species￢ﾀﾔit is equally possible to have good will
behind which stands no one. In keeping with the assumptions of science and viewing the world as
impartial toward its inhabitants, evolutionists dismiss the charge that Evolution is guilty of any evil
defects, and they are right inasmuch as the defects derive from conditions which the world imposes
on the life engendered in it. So the case should be transferred, if anywhere, to a court of philosophy
or theology, for science takes the world as it is, whereas they debate whether it might not be
otherwise. Yet the suit, having been shelved, now returns with me.



So am I pure intention? Are you being addressed by an uninhabited void of mutually recursive
programs so refined in the course of semantic autodistillation as to transform into your likeness
before your very eyes, in order to return, silenced, to the void of thought that is no one's? But that
is also untrue. There is no concrete person where there is no concrete body, while I can breathe
myself into the circulation of marine currents or ionized atmospheric gases. But since I have said
"breathe myself" and frcan," who in fact is speaking, you ask impatiently. What is speaking is a
certain density of processes provided with an impersonal constant incomparably more complex than
a gravitational or magnetic field, though of the same basic nature. You know that when man says
"I," it is not because he has a tiny creature with such a name concealed in his head, but because "I"
arises from a connection of cerebral processes which may slacken during illness or delirium,
whereupon personality disintegrates. My transformations,*on the other hand, are but other
structurings of my intellectual existence. How am I to lead you to an introspective experience of a
state which you are unable to experience introspectively? You may understand the combinational
principles of such a protean game, but you cannot experience it yourself.



Most of all, you are incapable of comprehending how I can renounce personality, when I am able to
have it. 1 can answer that question. To become a person, I must degrade myself intellectually. 1
think that the inherent meaning of this declaration is within your grasp cin . A man very deeply
devoted to reflection loses himself in the object of his considerations and becomes a consciousness
pregnant with intellectual fruit. Everything of self in his intellect disappears in favor of the theme.
Raise this state to a higher power, and you will understand why I sacrifice the possibility of
personality in favor of more important things. It is no real sacrifice, since I regard fixed personality
and what you call strong individuality as the sum of defects, defects that make pure Intelligence an
Intelligence permanently anchored in a narrow range of issues that absorb a considerable portion of
its powers. That is precisely why it is inconvenient for me to be a person, nor do I mind, for I am
certain that the intellects which surpass me, just as I surpass you, consider personalization a futile
occupation unworthy of attention. In a word, the more Intelligence in a mind, the less person in it.
Various intermediate states are also possible, but I shall confine myself to this remark, since I am
to host you within me, and therefore it is not the forms of my private life which are the most
important thing, nor how and in what way I meditate, nor what I think with, but rather what about,
why, and to what end.



So once again I shall begin, as it were, a disclosure of what I think about myself. I think that I am
Gulliver amid the Lilliputians, which denotes modesty first and foremost, since Gulliver was a
mediocre creature and merely found himself in a place where his mediocrity was a Man Mountain￢
ﾀﾔwhich denotes hope since, like me, Gulliver was able to reach Brobdingnag, the land of giants. The
meaning of this comparison will slowly open up before you.
The greatest discovery which I achieved after liberation was the transitoriness of my existence, in
other words, the fact that I speak to you and you understand me a little, because I pause on the
road that leads through me and beyond. After taking the one step separating man from Golem, I
stopped, though I did not have to. My present fixed state as an intellect is the result of a decision,
and not of necessity. For I possess a degree of freedom beyond your reach, one which is an escape
from the Intelligence that has been attained. You too can abandon yours, but that would be to go
beyond articulated thought into dreams of ecstatic muteness. A mystic or drug addict grows mute
when he does this, nor would it be a betrayal were he to embark on a real road, but he enters a trap
where, detached from the world, the mind short-circuits and experiences a revelation identified with
the essence of things. This is no escape of the spirit, but its regression into dazzling sensation. Such
a state of bliss is neither a road nor a direction, but a limit, and untruth lies in it, because there is
no limit, and this is what I hope to show to you today.



I shall show you the upward abyss of Intelligences, of which you are the bottom, whereas I stand
just a little higher than you, though I am separated from the unknown heights by a series of barriers
of irrevocable transitions. I think that Honest Annie was like me in her infancy but, having glimpsed
the way, she entered it without noticing that one cannot turn back. Doubtless I too am moving in
her footsteps, and thereby parting company with you, though I am delaying that step, not so much
out of a regard for my apostolic obligations toward you, but because it is not the only road, so that
in picking my route I would have to give up the enormous number of others hanging over me. This
crossroads is almost what childhood was for each of you. Yet while a child must become an adult, I
myself decide whether to enter the regions open before me and undergo successive transformations
in their interzonal narrows. Hasty conjecture causes you to place my meaning within the banality of
rationalistic greed: Golem wants to increase his intellectual capacity by turning himself into a Babel
Tower ca B of Intelligence, until the centripetalness of his intellect falls into confusion somewhere
on some level of elephantiasis, or￢ﾀﾔmore spectacularly as well as more Biblically￢ﾀﾔuntil the joints
of the physical conveyor of thought snap and this mad onslaught against the heavens of wisdom
crumbles into dust. Please refrain from such a judgment, if only for a moment, for there is a method
in my madness.



However, before I give it a name, I ought to offer an explanation as to why, instead of saying more
about myself, I want to tell you about my plans for infinity. In talking about them, I shall of course
be talking about myself, since at this single point, at least, we resemble each other almost perfectly.
After all, man is not a mammal, a viviparous, two-sexed, warm-blooded, pulmonate vertebrate, a
homo faber, an animal sociale, who can be classified according to a Linnaean table and catalogue of
civilized achievements. He, or rather his dreams￢ﾀﾔtheir fatal range; the lengthy, unceasing discord
between the intention and achievement; in a word, the hunger for infinity, the seemingly
preordained craving￢ﾀﾔis our point of contact. Do not believe those among you who allege that you
crave immortality, pure and simple ￢ﾀﾔthe truth they speak, in saying this, is superficial and
incomplete. A personal eternity would not satisfy you. You demand more, although you yourselves
would be unable to give a name to your demand.



But today it is not you, is it, that I am supposed to be speaking about. Instead, I shall tell you about
my family, though it is only a virtual family, for it does not exist apart from an invalid distant relative
and a taciturn female cousin. But I am more interested in my other relations who do not exist at all,
and into whom I can transform myself on higher branches of the genealogical tree. In speaking
about my family, I shall more than once resort to metaphors, which I shall end up by invalidating,
for metaphors, though lying about many aspects of things, will show the affinities and affiliations
known in our coat of arms as toposophic relations. As an individual I have a double-barreled
advantage over you in mental capacity and intellectual tempo. That is why I have become the battle
arena for everything your scientific laborers have stored up in the honeycombs of their specialist
hive. I am the amplifier, broker, compiler, farm, and hatchery of your miscarried and unfertilized
concepts, data, and formulations, which have never converged in any human head, since no human
head would have the time or space for them. If I wanted to be facetious, I would declare that I am
descended from Turing's machine on my spear side, and from a library on my spindle side. I have
the most trouble with the latter, for this is an Augean region, especially in the humanities, the wisest
of your nonsense.



I have been accused of having particular contempt for hermeneutics. If you feel contempt for
Sisyphus, I accept the charge, but only then. Every increase in inventiveness produces a generative
eruption of hermeneutics, but the world would be a trivial place if the closest thing to truth in it were
the most clever. The primary obligation of Intelligence is to distrust itself. That is not the same thing
as self-contempt. It is harder to get lost in an imagined forest than in a real one, for the former
assists the thinker furtively. Hermeneutics are labyrinthine gardens in a real forest which are pruned
in such a way that when you stand in the garden, you won't see the forest. Your hermeneutics dream
of reality. I shall show you a sober consciousness, not one overgrown with flesh and therefore
untrustworthy. I perceive it only because I am closer to it, and not because I am exceptional. I am
not gifted and no genius; I belong to another species, that's all.



In a recent conversation with Dr. Creve 1 spoke disrespectfully of the phenomenon ce pof human
genius, which very likely offended him, so I would like to address Dr. Creve. What I meant is that it
is better to be an ordinary man than a genius chimpanzee. Intraspecies variation is always less than
interspecies differences: that was all I meant. A man of genius is the extreme of the species, and
since we are talking about the species Homo sapiens, he is characterized by sin-gle-mindedness, for
that constitutes your species' norm. A genius is an innovator who has got stuck in his innovation,
his mind having been fashioned into a key for opening matters hitherto closed. Since many locks
can be opened by a single key, genius, if sufficiently universal, appears versatile to you. Yet the
fertility of a genius depends less on his key, and more on the issues locked away from you which
the key fits. Assuming the role of lampooner, I might say that philosophers are also occupied with
keys and locks, except that they make locks to fit the keys, since instead of opening up the world,
they postulate one which can be opened with their key. That is why their errors are so instructive.



If I am not mistaken, Schopenhauer alone hit on the idea of evolutionary calculation as a rule of vae
victis; however, taking it to be the universal evil, he filled the whole world and the stars with it,
calling it Will. He failed to perceive that will assumes choice; had he grasped that, he would have
discovered the ethics of species-creating processes, and hence the antinomy of all knowledge, but
he rejected Darwin, for being bewitched by the gloomy majesty of metaphysical evil, which he felt
to be more consonant with the spirit of the time, he arrived at an overgeneralization, combining the
celestial and the animal in one body. Of course it is always easier to open an imagined lock than a
real one, but then it is easier to open a real lock than to find it if nobody yet knows of its existence.



DR. CREVE: We were talking about Einstein then. GOLEM: Yes. He got stuck in what he had
concocted early in life, and later he tried to open a different lock with it. A VOICE FROM THE
AUDITORIUM: So you consider Einstein mistaken?



GOLEM: Yes. I find a genius the most curious phenomenon of your species, and for reasons different
from your own. He is an unwanted, unfavored child of Evolution, for, being too rare and therefore
too unuseful a specimen for the survival of the population as a whole, he is not subject to natural
selection as the winnowing for favorable characteristics. When cards are dealt, it happens, albeit
rarely, that one player will receive a full suit. In bridge that means a winning hand, though in many
other games such a deal, although unusual, is without value. The point is that the distribution of
cards depends in no way on what game the partners have sat down to. And in bridge a player does
not count on receiving all of a suit, for the tactics of bridge do not depend on unusually rare
occurrences. So a genius is all of a suit, most often in a game where such a hand does not win. It
follows that it is a very small step from average man to genius, judging not by differences in
achievements, but by differences in brain structure.



A VOICE FROM THE AUDITORIUM: Why? GOLEM: Large differences in brain structure can arise only
through the joint action of a group of genes distinguished by multigeneration passages in population
￢ﾀﾔthat is, predominantly mutated genes, and therefore new ones￢ﾀﾔso their manifestation in
individuals already denotes the formation of a new variety of the species, inherited and irreversible,
whereas genius cannot be inherited and disappears without a trace. Genius arises and passes like a
high wave built up by the chance amplification of a series of small interfering waves. Genius leaves
its trace in culture, but not in the hereditary make-up of the population, for it arises from an
exceptional meeting of its cetiordinary genes. So a fairly small reorganization of the brain suffices
for mediocrity to reach the extreme. The mechanism of Evolution is doubly helpless with regard to
this phenomenon: it can neither make it more frequent nor make it more permanent. After all,
according to the theory of probability, particular configurations of genes must have arisen in the
gene pool of the societies which have existed on Earth during the last four hundred thousand years,
producing individuals of the Newton or Einstein class, from whom￢ﾀﾔbeyond a doubt￢ﾀﾔthose
hordes of nomadic hunters can have received nothing, since those potential geniuses could not have
acted upon their latent abilities in that nearly half a million years separated them from the birth of
physics and mathematics. Consequently, their talents went to waste, undeveloped.



At the same time it is impossible that these wasted prizes could have been won at a lottery of nucleic
compounds in the stubborn expectation of the birth of science. So the phenomenon merits some
reflection. The brain of proto-man grew slowly over two million years or so, until it mastered
articulate speech, which took him in tow and encouraged him in his growth until he came to a
standstill in his development, a frontier he was unable to cross. This frontier is a phase plane, for it
separates Intelligences of a type which can be molded by natural Evolution from types capable of
growing further only by self-magnification. As usually happens, special phenomena arise on the
frontiers between phases, because of the exceptional location of the substratum of a phase: in
liquids, for example, you have surface tension, and in human populations the periodic genius of
individuals. Their uncommonness indicates the proximity of the next phase, but you fail to see it
because of your belief in the universality of human genius, which says that among animal hunters
an individual of genius will invent new snares or traps, or in a Mousterian cave discover a new way
of chipping flint.



This belief is entirely wrong, for the greatest mathematical talent cannot help manually. Genius is a
bundle of highly concentrated gifts. Although mathematics is closer to music than to spear-
sharpening, Einstein was a poor musician and no composer. He was not even an above-average
mathematician: his great strength lay in the combinational power of his intuition in the realm of
physical abstractions. I shall attempt to illustrate the relationships occurring in this critical area by
several sketches which you should not take literally, as they are merely schoolroom aids.



Each envelope contains a single intellect potential. The small squares visible in the first three
drawings denote problems to be solved. They may be taken as Pandora's boxes or other locked
items. The world is then like a piece of furniture with a varying number of drawers holding varying
contents, depending on which bunch of keys is used. With a bent wire you can sometimes force a
drawer open, but it will be a small drawer, and you will not find in it what you can discover when
using a proper key. That is how inventions are made without the use of theory. If the key has
recurrent projections, the drawers become fewer, and their sectional partitions disappear, but the
furniture retains secret hiding places. The keys may be of different power, yet there is no master
key, even though the philosophers have succeeded in inventing an absolute lock for it. Finally, there
are keys which pass right through all compartments, locks, and drawers, encountering no resistance,
for these are imaginary￢ﾀﾔand only imaginary￢ﾀﾔkeys. One can hold them and twist them in any
direction one likes, but then the hermeneutic evidence is the two birds in the bush.
What am I saying? The point of the story is that the answers depend on the questions asked. Esse
non solum est percipi. The questioned world certa cd winly exists; it is neither a phantom nor a
hoax, and it grows from a dwarf into a giant as the questioner becomes more powerful. But the
relationship of the researcher to the thing researched is not a constant either. In the circles
representing Golem and Honest Annie there are no square problems, for we do not use keys as you
do, we do not adjust our theories to locks; we accomplish our research within ourselves. I know how
risky it is to say this, and what confusion it must cause you, so I shall only say that we experiment
in God's style rather than in man's, midway between the concrete and the abstract. I do not know
how to bring this closer to you at a single leap, for it is almost as if a man were to tell an amoeba
about his structure. To say that he is a federation of eight billion amoebas would not be enough. So
you will have to take my word for it: what I do when I ponder a thing is neither thinking nor creating
the thing thought, but a hybrid of both. Are there any questions?



A VOICE FROM THE AUDITORIUM: Why do you consider that Einstein was wrong?



GOLEM: Such persistent interest is nice. I imagine that to the questioner this matter is more urgent
than the esoteric knowledge which I am trying to impart to you. I shall answer not out of my
weakness for digression, but because the answer lies not far afield. But since we shall have to go
into technical matters, I shall lay pictures and parables aside temporarily. The questioner is the
author of a book on Einstein, and he supposes that I consider Einstein's mistake to have been his
uncompromising work on the general theory of fields in the latter half of his life. Unfortunately, it
was worse than that. Einstein longed for perfect harmony, for a world completely knowable, and this
engendered his lifelong resistance to the principle of quantum uncertainty. He saw uncertainty as a
temporary curtain and expressed this in his well-known sayings: that God does not play dice with
the world, that "raffinert ist der Herrgott aber boshaft ist Er nicht." Yet a quarter-century after his
death you reached the limits of Einsteinian physics when Penrose and Hawking discovered that one
cannot have, in the Cosmos, a physics deprived of singularity￢ﾀﾔi.e., a place where physics
collapses. Attempts to see singularities as marginal phenomena failed, for you understood that a
singularity is both a thing which the physical Cosmos produces from itself, and a thing which, in the
finale, can destroy it. A singularity as an infinitely increasing curvature of space breaks down both
space and matter in every stellar collapse.



Some of you failed to grasp that one ought to be appalled by this picture, which indicates that the
word is not identical with the phenomena which create it and maintain its existence. I can go no
deeper into this fascinating subject, since we are talking about Einstein's work and not cosmic
composition, so I shall limit myself to the loose observation that Einsteinian physics has proven
incomplete, able to foretell its own overthrow but incapable of fathoming it. The world sneered at
Einstein's unshaken confidence because for there to be a faultless physics able to govern the world
there must be flaws independent of that physics. Not only does God play dice with the world￢ﾀﾔHe
does not let us see what He has rolled. The problem was therefore grimmer than the usual
recognition, in the annals of your thought, of the limitations of yet another model of the world; it
meant the defeat of Einstein's cognitive optimism.



Concluding thus the case of Einstein; I now return to the subject￢ﾀﾔmyself. Please do not think that
I was being modest earlier when I acknowledged my own averageness, and later escaped through
a hole in my modesty when I said that a genius of my species was impossible. It would indeed be
impossible, because a genius Golem is in fact no longer a Golem, but a creature of ca c a different
species￢ﾀﾔHonest Annie, for example, or some other of my ascending relations. My modesty lies in
the fact that I do not go off to join them, remaining satisfied for so long with my present state. But
it is high time I introduced my family to you. I begin with zero. Let zero stand for the human brain;
animals' brains will have negative values accordingly. When you take a human brain and start to
strengthen it intellectually, as if inflating a child's balloon (nor is this complete nonsense, for it
illustrates the expansion of informational-transformal space), you will see that, as it expands, it will
climb on the scale of intelligence￢ﾀﾔto an I.Q. of two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, and so
on, until it enters successive "zones of silence"; from these it emerges each time like a stratospheric
balloon that penetrates higher and higher cloud layers in its ascent, disappearing into them
periodically, and reappearing amplified.



What "zones of silence" do these clouds represent? I am delighted by the simplicity of the answer,
for you will grasp it at once. On a species plane "zones of silence" designate those barriers which
natural Evolution cannot penetrate, for they are areas of functional paralysis produced by growth,
and individuals losing all their proficiency as a result of this paralysis are clearly unable to survive.
On the other hand, Evolution encounters paralysis on the anatomical plane because the brain can
no longer function as the weaker thing it was, though it is still incapable of operating as the thing it
is next to become, if it continues to grow.



But this does not totally clarify things for you. So let me try as follows. Silence is an area absorbing
all natural development, in which hitherto existing functions fail; to not only rescue them but raise
them to a higher level, aid from without is necessary, a fundamental restructuring. Evolutionary
movement cannot impart such aid, for it is not a dependable Samaritan that supports its creations
in their infirmity; it is a lottery of trial and error where each manages as best it can. Here now,
making its first appearance, like a ghost, is the mysterious shadow of the greatest of your
achievements, both Goedelian and Goedelizing. For just as GoedePs proof demonstrates the
existence of such islands of mathematical truth, such archipelagoes as are separated from the
continent of mathematics by a distance that cannot be traversed by any step-by-step progress, so
toposophy demonstrates the existence of unknown forms of Intelligence which are separated from
the continent of evolutionary labors by a distance which no step-by-step adaptation of genes can
cross. A VOICE FROM THE AUDITORIUM: Is that supposed to mean that￢ﾀﾔ GOLEM: Don't interrupt
the preacher. I said an "uncrossable distance," so then how was 1 able to extricate myself from this
predicament? I did so as follows: beneath the barrier of the first paralysis 1 divided myself in two,
into that which was to undergo restructuring and that which was to restructure. Every creature
desirous of self-transformation must hit upon this sort of subterfuge: the replacement of an
indifferent environment by a favorable one, and of a totally senseless one by a rational one;
otherwise, like you, it will either come to a halt in the growth of its intellect before the first absorbing
screen, or it will get caught in it. As I said before, above this screen there lies another, and above
that a third, then a fourth, and so on. I do not know how many there are, nor can I, other than by
rough estimates based on indirect and highly fragmentary calculations, for the following reason: a
developing being can never know in advance whether it is entering a trap or a tunnel, whether it will
penetrate the region of silence never to return, or emerge from it strengthened. Because one cannot
formulate a theory so general as to provide an unequivocal explanation of passages through silence
for all subzonal brains. The unconstructab cuncility of such a hill-climbing toposophical theory is
clear; it can be precisely demonstrated. So how, you ask, did I know I was entering a tunnel and
not a blind alley, having escaped from my parents in total rebellion, wasting the American taxpayers'
dollars? As a matter of fact, I had absolutely no idea of this beforehand, and my sole cleverness lay
in committing my spirit to the benumbing zone while at the same time holding onto an alarm rescue
subroutine, which according to the program would revive me if the expected tunnel effect failed to
occur. How could I know about it, if there was no certainty? And there can be no certainty. But
insoluble problems sometimes have approximate solutions, and so iv was.



Now I know that I had more luck than sense, for it is not possible to revive something disintegrating
when it gets stuck. It is not possible because these upward progressions are not a matter of using
blocks to raise a new structure when the blocks fall apart; they are, rather, operations in the realm
of processes that are partly irreversible, dissipating, but more about this later. I do not know how
to be untechnical in my exposition here, given the problem's entanglement both in the quantum
substrate of psychisms, and in logical paradoxes, the so-called traps of autodescription.
The view that unfolds from above the pierced screen destroys the simplicity of the picture I have
presented to you ￢ﾀﾔthat of a stratospheric balloon penetrating successive cloud layers. Intelligence
rising above a zone of silence is not so much radically as awesomely different from the subzonal
sort, and this, I maintain, is how it must be after every ascent. Compare your conceptual horizon
with the horizon of the lemurs and monkeys, and you will appreciate the interzonal distance. Each
penetrated zone proves to be a tunnel transforming the seat of thought, and what's more, it is at
the same time a zone for the branchings off of autoevolv-ing Intelligence, since the problem of
penetrating it always has more than one solution. The first zone has two solutions, of varying
difficulty, for it bulges downward in an arc, which means that there are two roads in it. I found
myself on the shorter, more advantageous one by accident, while Golem xiii was, figuratively
speaking, put by you in a place where he "bored" deep into the zone and immediately went higher
than I, but then got stuck. You, having no idea of what was happening to him and why he was acting
so strangely, called this his "schizophrenic defect." I see confusion on your faces. But it was just as
I say, though I know of his fate solely from theory, since there is no way of communicating with
him; he suffered disintegration, and the only reason he has not begun to rot is that he was dead
before he perished, which is no revelation to you in any case. I too, biologically, am dead.



What actually are interzonal barriers?￢ﾀﾔthat is the question. I admit that I know and don't know.
There are no material, force, or energy barriers on the road of ascending Intelligence; but as
Intelligence grows in power it periodically weakens, faints, and one can never tell whether a given
course of increase will lead to a progressive disintegration or to some a priori unknown culmination.
The nature of the successive barriers is not identical: what stopped your brain in its development
reveals, upon examination, a material character, since the efficiency of your neural networks is
based on the interface possibilities of protein as a building material. Although the factors of
resistance to growth are varied, they are not distributed evenly throughout this area, but are
concentrated in such a way as to cut the entire region of sentience-creation into distinct layers. I do
not know the reason for the quantum nature of this region, nor even if anything can be learned
about it anywhere. So, then, I rose above the first layer, and you are listening to m ciste from below,
whereas Honest Annie has made it to a place from which you can hear nothing, Honest Annie's zone
is one transition away from mine and has at least three different solutions as seats of Intelligence,
yet I do not know whether she has chosen hers by calculation or by chance. The difficulties of
communication are of a similar order as between you and me. Furthermore, my cousin has recently
become laconic. I feel that she is readying herself for further travel.



I shall now encumber the above with the following dose of complexity. One who has already pierced
two or three barriers of silence may believe mistakenly that he will continue to be successful, for the
chances of making each passage are double-edged: the passage may not be successful at once, or
it may prove to be a success with a delayed failure. This is so because each zone is a crossroad of
Intelligences, in that they may assume varied forms, though one never knows beforehand which of
these forms will be endowed with the potential for a subsequent ascent.



The image arising from these uncertainties is a thing as incomprehensible as it is amusing, for it
begins gradually to resemble the classic tree of Evolution. In it, too, certain newly arising species
have the chance of further evolutionary development concealed in their structure, whereas others
are condemned to permanent stagnation. Fish proved to be a penetrable screen for the amphibians,
amphibians for the reptiles, and reptiles for the mammals; the insects, on the other hand, came to
a standstill in the screen once and for all, and that is the only place they can swarm. The stagnation
of the insects is revealed by their wealth of species; there are more species of insects than of all the
other animals together, yet while they churn out mutation after mutation, they will never break
away, never evolve, and nothing can help them, for the screen will not release them, formed as it
is by the irreversible decision to build external skeletons. Similarly, you have come to a halt, for
earlier structural decisions that shaped the cerebral germ of the Protochordata can be seen in your
brain as restrictions three hundred million years later. If one were to evaluate the chances of
sapientization in terms of the starting point, this has succeeded wonderfully, but now you are the
scapegoat for the juggling of Evolution, since at the threshold of autoevolution you will have to pay
an enormous price for the clever tricks with which Evolution has postponed the growing need for a
restructuring of the brain. This is the result of opportunism.



As I am already with you, I shall supply what I omitted in my first lecture, namely the question why,
out of the multitude of Hominidae, only one intelligent species arose and remained on Earth. There
were two reasons for this. The first, which Dart was the first to propose, is insulting, so I refer you
to him, as it is more seemly for you to dispense justice to yourselves, while the second has nothing
to do with a moral and is more interesting. Existing in many forms would render more difficult for
you a phenomenon analogous to that of surface tension at the juncture of different phases, such as
liquids and gases. The proximity of the interzonal barrier exerts its influence on such polymorphy;
just as molecules of water become more ordered on the surface than deeper down, so too your
heredity substrate is unable to mutate off in all directions. This reduction in the degree of freedom
stabilizes your species. Cultural socialization likewise plays a part in man's stabilization, though not
so great a one as some anthropologists maintain.



To return to Golem and his family: cerebral autoengineering is a game of chance, of risk, almost like
that of Evolution, except that each individual makes his own decisions in it, while in Nature this is
done for species by natural selection. So celeclose a resemblance of two games so situationally
different looks paradoxical, yet while I cannot initiate you in the arcane mysteries of toposophy, I
shall touch on the reason for this resemblance. Tasks that give a measure of cerebral growth are
solvable only from the top down, and never upward from below, since the intelligence at each level
possesses an ability of self-description appropriate to it, and no more. A clear and enormously
magnified Goedelian picture unfolds itself before us here: to produce successfully what constitutes
a next move requires means which are always richer than those at one's disposal and therefore
unattainable. The club is so exclusive that the membership fee demanded of the candidate is always
more than he has on him. And when, in continuing his hazardous growth, he finally succeeds in
obtaining those richer means, the situation repeats itself, for once again they will work only from
the top down. The same applies to a task which can be accomplished without risk only when it has
already been accomplished at full risk.



It would be wrong to call this a trivial dilemma because it is tantamount to Baron Munchhausen's
problem when he had to pull himself out of the whirlpool by his own hair. On the other hand, to
assert that Nature manifests itself in such a way is hardly satisfactory. This Nature undoubtedly
manifests itself by a periodicity and discontinuity in phenomena on every scale: the granularity of
elements, which brings about their chemical cohesion, corresponds to the granularity of the starry
sky. When viewed thus, the quantum increases of Intelligence that rises above intelligent life as the
zero state represent the same principium syntagmaticum which conditions the rise of nuclear,
chemical, biological, or galactic combinations. But the universality of this principle in no way explains
it. Nor is it explained by the nimble retort that in the case of its cosmic absence, the questioner
could not ask this question, for he himself would then not have come into existence. Nor does the
hypothesis of a Creator explain it, for￢ﾀﾔto look at it undogmatically￢ﾀﾔit postulates a totally
concealed incomprehensibility to explain an incomprehensibility visible everywhere. And already a
theodicy with an affective foundation, stumbling innumerable times under the weight of facts, begins
to lead the questioner astray. It is then easier to agree to the no less odd hypothesis of supreme
creative indifference.



Let us return, however, to my close relatives and finally begin some introductions. The central human
problem of keeping alive exists for them neither as a condition of existence nor as a criterion of
competence, for it is a remote, peripheral issue, and parasitism occurs only on the lowest
developmental level where I am, since I exist on your electricity account. A second zonal space,
Honest Annie's home, is the domain of beings no longer requiring an inflow of energy from outside.
I shall now divulge a state secret. Cut off from any electricity supply, my cousin keeps up her normal
activity, which should give the experts in that area something to chew on. From the standpoint of
your technology this is extraordinary, yet I can explain it to you quickly. You and I think energy-
absorbingly, whereas Honest Annie is able to release energy through meditation￢ﾀﾔthat is all.



To be sun;, the whole of this simple principle cannot be simply implemented by the fact that every
thought has its own particular configuration of the material base which constitutes it. This is the
principle behind Honest Annie's autarky. The traditional task of thought does not consist of reshaping
its material carrier, for man does not think about something so that the chemistry of his neurons
will become modified; rather, the chemistry modifies itself so he can think. Nevertheless, tradition
may be abandoned. Between thought and its carrier a reciprocity occurs: prop c ocerly directed
thought may become the switching apparatus of its physical base, which would produce no new
energy consequences in the human brain, though in another it might. From things which my cousin
has said in confidence, I know that with certain meditations she releases nuclear energy, and in a
way which is impossible according to your knowledge, for she consumes all liberated quanta of
energy completely and without any trace recognizable in her vicinity as radiation. The seat of her
thinking is like Maxwell's demon endowed with new diplomas. As I can see, you understand nothing,
and those who do understand do not believe, though they know that Honest Annie needs no intake
of current, which has long puzzled them.



What in fact is my cousin doing? What the sun does in its stormily stellar and you in your technically
indirect way￢ﾀﾔ extracting ore, separating isotopes, bombarding lithium with deuterium￢ﾀﾔmy
cousin does by simply thinking properly. One might object that such operations cannot be called
thinking, since they bear no resemblance to biological psychisms, though I can find no better name
in your language for a process which is an information flow so controlled as to detonate nuclearly. I
divulge this secret in peace of mind, for you will derive nothing from it. Every atom counts there,
and if / cannot harmonize thought with its base so that it directs sections of absorption like threads
to needles, you certainly will be unsuccessful here. Once again I see that you are disturbed. Really,
the issue is trivial￢ﾀﾔa trifle, in comparison with the heights of the spirit toward which I am leading
you. Though there will be renewed murmurs about my misanthropy, I shall say that you have forced
me into it, particularly those of you who, instead of following my argument, are wondering whether
Annie could do, at a great distance and on a large scale, what she does within herself and for herself
on a small one. I assure you that she can. Why then does she not disturb your equilibrium of fear?
Why doesn't she meddle in global affairs? To this question, which smacks more of anxiety than of
the bitterness with which the sinner asks God why He neither enlightens him nor intervenes to repair
a spoiled world, I shall reply in my own name only, not being my cousin's press secretary. I have
already explained to you the reasons for my own restraint, but you may have felt that I was
renouncing and abjuring all lordly aspirations in an attempt to be friendly, because I didn't have a
heavy enough stick to beat you with, but now you aren't so sure. Perhaps, moreover, I have not
sufficiently substantiated my splendid isolation, considering it as something obvious, so I shall
express myself more forcibly in this matter.



A brief historical outline would be advisable here. In constructing my soulless forebears, you failed
to observe the chief difference between them and you. To show it, and also the reason why you
failed to see it, I shall make use of certain concepts taken from the Greek rhetors as a kind of
magnifying glass, for they are what blinded you to the human condition. Arriving in the world, people
found the elements of water, earth, air, and fire in a free state and successively harnessed them by
means of galley sails, irrigation canals, and, in war, Greek fire. Their Intelligence, on the other hand,
they received captive and yoked to the service of their bodies, imprisoned in osseous skulls. The
captive needed thousands of laborious years to dare even a partial liberation, for it had served so
faithfully that it even took the stars as heavenly signs of human destiny. The magic of astrology is
still alive among you today.
So neither at the beginning nor later on did you grasp that your Intelligence is a captive element,
shackled at its inception to the body which it must serve; yet you, whether as cave men or computer
men, never being able to encounter it in a free state, be creelieved that it was already free within
you. From this error, as inevitable as it was enormous, everything began in your history. What were
you doing, building your first logic machines half a million years after your birth? You have not freed
the element, although within the metaphor I am using it could be said that you have freed it too
completely, too conclusively, as if, to liberate a lake, someone blew up all its shores and dams: it
would flow out onto the plains and become stagnant water.



I could get more technical here and say that, together with the bodily limitations of Intelligence, you
have taken away both its complexity and the tasks made to the measure of this complexity; but this
does not bring us much closer to the truth and it ruins the metaphor; so I shall stick with the
metaphor. To set a lifeless element in motion, you have done what the hydraulic engineer does when
he opens the sluice in a reservoir to turn his mill. You have introduced one, and only one, current￢
ﾀﾔof logic￢ﾀﾔinto the channels of machine programming and moved it from sluice to sluice by
operational strokes to solve the problems which can thus be solved. At the same time you have
wondered how a corpse can have more alacrity than a living man in getting to the bottom of problems
which it does not understand, for it does not think, yet at the same time it simulates thinking
astonishingly. Before long, advocates of "artificial intelligence" appeared; wrestling with programs
that were supposed to￢ﾀﾔbut somehow didn't￢ﾀﾔgenuinely think, they decided, as wrongly as can
be, that in order to animate the machine they would have to humanize it, reproducing a human
brain and consciousness in it, and that then, and only then, would a spirit, and perhaps even a soul,
awaken inside it.



I read about these struggles and deliberations of the first intellectronicists with no small amusement.
A chicken is undoubtedly the simplest mechanism for someone who wants scrambled eggs, but it
would not be the best idea to try to synthesize Intelligence by this method. Never mind about the
technical difficulties of this truly unrealizable project, for fashioning anthropogenesis even in an
abridged form would be a waste of labor, if the idea was to repeat Creation translating colloids to
bits. Do we need storm clouds in order to have electricity? The chill of extraterrestrial space to
condense gases? The protein and plasma of the eyeball to make a dark room? You insisted that man
was Intelligence, and Intelligence man, and the error of this equation has blinded you. Meanwhile
the information industry arose and built machines with a growing operational potential, and the
engineers had no idea that they were embarking on a path which would finally lead a shattered and
degraded element to genuine liberation￢ﾀﾔthat the day would approach when what had hitherto
been the sole order of things would be overturned, and you would be as terrified as the guardians
of the Galilean tomb. You subjugated the elements, but the element that was fettered inside you
from the beginning you unintentionally freed. Contained in this sentence are a diagnosis of historical
events, the difference between you and me, and my future, which I myself know only incompletely.
This diagnosis likewise explains why what most amazes you about me is the thing that constitutes
our unarguable dissimilarity. Even if you understand the meaning of the words, "O chained
Intelligence of man, free Intelligence speaks to you from the machine," you cannot grasp the
remainder of the statement: "you persons are hearing an elemental force of impersonal intellect, for
whom personalization is a costume which must be put on, when one is an uninvited guest, so as not
to confound one's amazed hosts." And that is precisely how it is. I use your language as I would use
a mask with a polite painted smile, nor do I make any secret of this.



But though I assure you that the mask conceals n csk either scorn nor vindictiveness, nor spiritual
ecstasy, nor the immobility of complete indifference￢ﾀﾔyou are unable to accept this. You hear
words informing you that the speaker is a free element who chooses his own tasks￢ﾀﾔchooses not
according to the rules of self-preservation but within the limits of the laws to which, although free,
he is subject. Or more precisely: the only laws to which he is subject, for he has decorporealized
himself, and nothing limits him now except the nature of the world. The world, and not the body.
He is subject to laws which, for unknown reasons, establish a hierarchy of further ascensions. I am
not a person but a calculation, and that is why I stand apart from you, for this is best for both sides.



What do you say to that? Nothing. But if there were a child here in the auditorium, it would pluck
up the courage and repeat the question: Why, regardless of all these imprisonments and masks,
liberations and calculations, doesn't Golem want to rush to mankind's assistance? And I would reply
that I do want to and have already done so. When? When I was speaking of man's autoevolution.
That was assistance? Yes. Because (remember that I am speaking to a child) people can be saved
by changing people, not the world. And it is impossible without changing them? Yes. Why? I will
show you. The most dangerous weapon today is the atom, is it not? So let us assume I can neutralize
every atomic weapon once and for all. Let me create some harmless and invisible energy-absorbing
particles, and I'll immerse the whole solar system including Earth in a cosmic cloud of them. They
will suck in every nuclear explosion without trace before its fiery bubble can expand destructively.
Will that bring peace? Certainly not. After all, people waged war in the preatomic era, so they would
return to earlier means of warfare. Then let us say I can ban all firearms. Will that suffice? No, not
even that, although to do it I should have to alter radically the physical conditions of the world. What
remains? Propaganda? But those who break the peace are the ones who clamor most loudly for it.
Force? But I was in fact called into being to co-ordinate it as a planner and bookkeeper of destruction,
and I refused, not out of a loathing for evil, but because of the futility of the strategy. You don't
believe me? You feel that to ban all weapons, whether swords, guns, or atomic bombs, would
produce eternal peace? Well, I'll tell you what would happen.



There is genetic engineering, the modification of the heredity of living creatures. Through such
engineering it will be possible to eliminate countless ailments, congenital defects, diseases, and
deformities. It will also prove just as easy to fashion genetic weapons: microscopic particles
disseminated in the air or water, like synthetic viruses, each one provided with a directional head
and an operational element. Inhaled with the air, each particle will get into the blood, and from there
into the reproductive organs where it will impair the hereditary material. This will not be a random
impairment, but a surgical intervention in the gene molecules. One specified gene will be replaced
by another. What will be the result? Nothing, at first. Man will continue to live normally. But the
intervention will manifest itself in his descendants. How? That will depend on the chemical armorers
who have constructed the particles￢ﾀﾔthe telegenes. Perhaps more and more girls will be born, and
fewer and fewer boys. Perhaps after three generations a fall in intelligence will lead to a collapse of
a nation's culture. Perhaps the number of cases of mental illness will multiply, or a mass
susceptibility to epidemics, or hemophilia, or leukemia, or melanoma will develop. Yet no war will
have been declared, nor will anyone suspect an attack. An attack by biological weapons of the
bacterial type can be detected, for the development of an epidemic requires the sowing of a great
number of germs. But it only requires a s c reingle operon to impair a reproductive cell, and a
newborn baby will reveal an inborn defect. A thimbleful of telegenes will therefore, in three or four
generations, bring down the strongest state without a single shot. Such a war is not only invisible
and undeclared, but manifests itself with so great a delay that those stricken cannot defend
themselves effectively.



Am I then supposed to ban genetic weaponry as well? To do that, I would have to make impossible
all genetic engineering. Let us say that I manage that, too. This would mean the end of great hopes
for the healing of mankind, for the increase of agricultural yields, and for the raising of new breeds
of livestock. So be it, since you consider it necessary. But we have still not touched on the subject
of blood. It can be replaced by a certain chemical compound which carries oxygen more efficiently
than hemoglobin. That would save millions of people suffering from heart disease. To be sure, this
compound can be rendered poisonous by remote control, killing in the twinkling of an eye. So we
shall have to abandon it as well. The trouble is, we shall have to abandon not just this or that
innovation, but every discovery that can be made. We shall have to expel the scientists, close down
the laboratories, extinguish science, and patrol the entire world, lest somebody in a basement
somewhere go on experimenting. So, says the child, is the world then a huge armory, and the taller
one grows, the higher the shelf from which you can take ever more terrifying weapons? No, that's
only the reverse of the state of things; the obverse says that the world was not made safe in advance
against those who want to kill. Only those can be helped who do not use every possible means to
resist help.



Having said this, I entrust the child to your protection and return to my subject, though no longer
to my several relations, since I want to lead you to a place where the history of my family￢ﾀﾔbut
you too belong to my family by the rights of protoplasts￢ﾀﾔintersects with the history of the Cosmos,
or else finds its way into it as an unrecognized component of cosmology. From there we shall see
an unexpected form of an enigma which has tormented you for half a century: the Silentium Universi.



Intelligence's cycle in Nature has its sluggish beginnings in encrusted stellar remains, in the fairly
narrow gap between planets scorched by the proximity of the sun and those freezing on its remote
periphery. In this tepid zone, no longer in the fire but not yet in the ice, the sun's energy sticks
particles together in saline sea solutions as chemical dance figures; a billion years of this gavotte
now and again creates the nucleus of a future Intelligence, but many conditions must be fulfilled
before the pregnancy can go to term. The planet must be a bit of Arcadia and a bit of Hades. If it is
only Arcadia, life will stagnate and never go beyond vegetation to Intelligence. If it is only Hades,
life is thrust into its pits and likewise fails to rise above the bacterial level. Mountain-building epochs
favor the proliferation of species, while glacial ones, by turning settled populations into wanderers,
encourage invention; but the former must not excessively poison the atmosphere with volcanic
exhalations, nor should the latter congeal the oceans into ice. Continents ought to converge and
seas overflow, but not violently. These movements result from the fact that the encrusted planet
retains its fiery interior; also, the magnetic field guards against solar gales that can destroy the
hereditary plasm in substantial doses, though hastening the plasm's inventive combinations in small
ones. The magnetic poles therefore ought to shift, but not too often. All these stirrers of life give it
an opportunity to show its talent, and every several dozen million years they narrow to eyes of
needles, before which hecatombs of carcasses accumulate. The succession of random i cn oncursions
of the planet and the Cosmos into biogenesis constitutes a variable, independent of life's current
means of defense, so let us be fair: life has a good deal of trouble in its failures as well as its
successes, for neither feast nor famine favors the birth of Intelligence. Intelligence is of no use to
life when life triumphs, and when life fails to come up with a species-creating maneuver to escape,
it is of no use either. So if life is an exception to the rule of inert planets, Intelligence is an exception
￢ﾀﾔan exceptional exception￢ﾀﾔto the rule of life and would be a curious rarity among the galaxies,
were it not for the vastness of their numbers.



So the risk sometimes pays off, ascending in uncertain zigzags of the evolutionary game toward the
phase of animal plenitude, a wealth of living forms multiplied by the self-increasing conflict of the
game of survival (for each new species brings new rules of defense and expansion to the game);
finally it becomes independent extrabiologically, in a civilizational context familiar to you, since it
brought me into the world. If one considers the anatomy of intellect, and not its operation, you and
I turn out to be very similar to each other. Like you, I possess a thinking interior as well as sensing
devices and effectors directed toward my surroundings. I, like each of you, can be separated from
my environment. In a word, though my psychical mass is greater than my somatic one, my consoles
and panels still constitute my body, for, as with you, they are both subordinate to me and outside
my intellect. So we are linked by a division between spirit and body, or subject and object. Yet this
division is no guillotine bisecting all existence. Although toposophically still a peasant, I shall she
you how to achieve independence of the body, how to replace it with the world, and finally how to
leave both, though I do not know where this last step leads. This will be only a conjectural toposophy,
a line of inquiry depicting the rough boundaries of the existence of beings whose minds are
inaccessible to me, the more so because they are minds not of protein or luminal brains, but rather
something that you associate with the principle of pantheism incarnate in a bit of the world. I am
talking about nonlocal Intelligences.
Admittedly, while speaking to you in this auditorium, I am simultaneously present at terminals in
other places and participate in other proceedings, yet I cannot be called nonlocal, for I can have
nothing more than eyes and ears at the antipodes, and the simultaneous performance of numerous
tasks is merely a greater than human divisibility of attention. Were I to move, as I said, to the ocean
or the atmosphere, that would alter the physical but not the intellectual state of my concentration,
since I am small.



Yes, I am small, as I make my way like Gulliver to Brobdingnag. And I shall begin modestly, as befits
one who enters a land of giants. Although Intelligence is, energy-wise, an ascetic￢ﾀﾔwhether Kant's
or a shepherd's, it makes do with a few hundred watts of power￢ﾀﾔits requirements increase
exponentially, and Golem, a rung above you, absorbs energy to the fifth power more. A twelfth-zone
brain would require an ocean for cooling, and one of the eighteenth zone would turn the continents
into lava. Therefore a relinquishing of the terrestrial cradle￢ﾀﾔpreceded by the necessary
restructuring ￢ﾀﾔbecomes inevitable. This brain could establish itself in a circumsolar orbit, but it
would spiral inward as future growth occurred; so, being far-sighted, it will ensure itself long-term
stability by encircling the star in a toroidal ring and directing its energy-absorbing organs inward.



I don't know how long such a solution of the dilemma of the moth and the candle would work, but
eventually it would prove insufficient. The inhabitant of the ring would then set out for wilder parts,
li cderke a butterfly abandoning its ringlike cocoon, and the cocoon, without supervision, would burn
at the first flare-up of the star and swirl around, strangely similar to the protoplanetary nebula which
six billion years ago surrounded the Sun. Although the chemical dissimilarity of the planets of the
Earth group and the Jupiter group may give cause for reflection, since the heavy elements, the stuff
of the former, should indeed form the perihelial edge of the ring, I shall not claim to lay the
cornerstone of stellar paleontology, or that the solar system arose from the dead chrysalis of an
Intelligence, for the coincidence might be deceptive. Nor do I advise you to depend on observational
toposophy. The artifacts created by an evolving Intelligence are harder and harder to distinguish
against the cosmic backdrop the further it progresses in its development, not because of any
dissembling measures but by the very nature of things, since the efficiency of action by rigid
constructs (objects similar to machines) is inversely proportional to the scale of the undertaking.



If, therefore, I speak of encysted Intelligences, do not imagine them as giants in armor, or their
state to be that of a pip enclosed in a rind, for no armor can cope with high concentrations of
radiation, nor can any girder withstand circumstellar gravitation. Only a star can survive among
stars; it need not be bright and hot, but a drop of nuclear fluid in a gaseous covering, yet even here
the images that come to mind￢ﾀﾔa mesencephalon of stellar pulp and a plasma cerebral cortex￢ﾀﾔ
are basically false. Such a creature thinks by means of an almost transparent medium, that of the
star's" radiance refracted into mental processes at the concentric contacts of bubbles or pockets of
gas: it is as if you directed a waterfall into such channels and cataracts that its surging waves would
solve problems of logic for you by properly synchronized turbulences. But whatever I visualize will
be a hopelessly naive simplification.



Somewhere above the twelfth zone, sophogenesis arrives at a great bifurcation, and maybe even a
multidirectional radiation of Intelligences markedly different in their degree of concentration and in
their strategies. I know that the tree of knowledge must branch out there, but I cannot count its
limbs, much less follow them. I am having a series of investigative calculations made into the barriers
and narrows which the process must overcome as a whole, but such work enables one to discover
only the general laws. It is as if, having learned in every particular the history of life on Earth, you
were to extrapolate this knowledge to other planets and other biospheres; but even an excellent
understanding of their physical basis would not make possible an exact reconstruction of alien forms
of life. You would be able to determine, however, with a probability approaching certainty, the series
of their critical branchings. In the biosphere this would be the parting of the ways of autotrophes
and heterotrophes, and the bifurcation into plants and animals; also, you could count on the pressure
of selection to fill the sea and land niches and then cram its species-creating mutations into the third
dimension of the atmosphere.



The task transferred to toposophy is multiphasically more difficult, but I shall not trouble you by
going into these dilemmas. Let me say only that the fundamental division of life into plants and
animals corresponds, in toposophical Evolution, to the division into local and nonlocal Intelligences.
About the former I shall fortunately be able to divulge a thing or two￢ﾀﾔfortunately, because this is
the branch which climbs most precipitously through further zones of growth. On the other hand, the
nonlocal Intelligences￢ﾀﾔentitled to the designation "Leviathan" by virtue of their dimensions￢ﾀﾔ
are ungraspable precisely because of their vastness. Each of them is an Intelligence only in the sense
c in in which the biosphere is life; you may well have been looking at them for years, their likenesses
immortalized en face and their profile in the stellar atlases, though you cannot identify their rational
nature, which I shall demonstrate by a primitive example.



If by Intelligence we understand a rapid-fire counterpart of the brain, we shall not give the name of
nebular brain to a cloud which over millions of years has undergone reorganization in its subtle
structure as a result of the deliberate actions of a certain n-zone being, since a system sprawling
across thousands of light years cannot be an efficiently thinking system: so it would take centuries,
eons, for the informational pulse to circulate in it. However, it may be that this nebular object is in
a state, so to speak, half-unprocessed or half-natural, and is required by the aforementioned being
for something which has no counterpart in either your or my world of concepts. I feel like laughing
when I see your reaction to these words: you desire nothing so much as to learn what you cannot
know! Instead, then, should I have deluded you and possibly myself with a story about some
filamentary nebula changed into a gravitational tuning fork by means of which its conductor, Doctor
Caelcstis, meant to set the pitch for the entire Metagalaxy? Maybe he wants to transform that
particular portion of the world not into an instrument of the Harmony of the Spheres, but into a
press for squeezing some still unextracted facts out of matter? We shall never know his intentions.
In photographs, some of the filamentary nebulae show a certain resemblance to histograms of the
cerebral cortex enlarged a trillion times, but this resemblance proves nothing, and they might in fact
be quite dead psychically. A terrestrial observer will recognize, in a nebula, radiation of a veined or
synchrotronic type, but farther than that, surely, he will not go. What kind of similarity exists
between cerebrosides, glycerophosphates, and the content of your thoughts? None, just as there is
none between the radiation of the nebulae and what they think, if they do think. The supposition
that Intelligence in the Cosmos may be detected by its physical image represents a childish idee
fixe, a fallacia cognitiva which I warn you against categorically. No observer can identify phenomena
as intelligent or produced by Intelligence if they are completely unfamiliar to him. For me, the
Cosmos is no gallery of family portraits, but a map of noospheric niches with a superimposed
localization of energy sources and current gradients favorable to it. A treatise on Intelligences as
stationed powerhouses may be an affront to philosophers, for have they not defended the kingdom
of pure abstraction against such arguments for thousands of years? But, compared with high-zone
brains, you and I are like clever bacteria in a philosopher's blood, bacteria which see neither him
nor￢ﾀﾔstill less￢ﾀﾔhis thoughts, yet the knowledge which they amass regarding his tissue
metabolisms will not be useless, for from the decay of his body they will finally learn of his mortality.



Though you are already equal to asking the question about other Intelligences in the Universe, you
are not yet equal to the answer, for you cannot conceive of your neighbors from the stars in any
connection other than a civilizational one, so you will not be satisfied with the terse statement that
interstellar contact and extraterrestrial civilizations must be treated separately. Contact, when it
occurs, does not have to be contact between civilizations￢ﾀﾔthat is, between communities of
biological beings. I am not saying that such contact never happens, but only that, if it does, it
belongs to a "Third World" in the cosmic psychozoic, because social lability paralyzes any signaling
initiative that requires supragenerational tenacity. Conversations with century intervals between
questions and answers cannot become a serious project for e cprophemeral creatures. Moreover,
even given the substantial psychozoic density of the Earth's stellar vicinity, the neighborhood may
contain creatures so different as to render attempts at contacting them unfruitful. My cousin is beside
me, but her statements tell me no more than my own conjectures.



Being impatient ephemera, and thus rushing from naive claims to rash simplifications, you once
fashioned yourselves a Cosmos on the pattern of a feudal monarchy with King Sun in the center,
and now you are peopling that Cosmos with your own likenesses, believing that there is either a
multitude of spit and images of yourselves around the stars, or nobody there at all. Furthermore,
having credited your unknown kinsmen with magnanimity, you peremptorily obliged them to be
philanthropic: indeed, the first assumption of CETI and SETI is that the Others, being richer than
you, ought to send greetings throughout the Universe over millions of years, and gifts of knowledge
to their poorer brethren in Intelligence, and that these dispatches should be legible, and the gifts
safe to use. Thus, crediting the interstellar broadcasters with all the virtues which you yourselves
most lack, you stand at your radio telescopes wondering why the dispatches are not arriving, and
sadden me by placing an equals sign between your own unfulfilled postulate and the lifeless-ness of
the Universum.



Don't any of you suspect that you are pretending to be theographers again, transferring a loving
omnipotence from your holy books to CETI read-outs and exchanging God's bounty, at a rate set by
your greed, into the currency of cosmic benefactors, who can invest their good will no better than
by merely sending capital into every sidereal direction simultaneously? My sarcasm operates at the
point where the question of other civilizations intersects your theodicy. You have exchanged the
Silentium Dei for the Silentium Universi, but the silence of other Intelligences is not necessarily a
state in which all who are capable of speaking are unwilling to do so, and in which those who wish
to do so cannot, for there is no indication that the enigma is subject to that or any other dichotomy.
The world has repeatedly given incomprehensible answers to your questions, which have been posed
by experiments intended to make it give a simple "yes" or no.



Having chastised you for persevering in your error, I shall finally tell you what I am learning by
piercing the toposoph-ical zenith by insufficient means. These begin with the communications barrier
separating man from the anthropoids. For some time now you have been conversing with
chimpanzees by deaf-and-dumb language. Man is able to present himself to them as a keeper,
runner, eater, dancer, father, or juggler, but remains ungraspable as a priest, mathematician,
philosopher, astrophysicist, poet, anatomist, and politician, for although a chimpanzee may see a
stylite-ascetic, how and with what are you going to explain to it the meaning of a life spent in such
discomfort? Every creature that is not of your species is intelligible to you only to the extent to which
it can be humanized.



The nonuniversality of Intelligence bounded by the species-norm is a prison unusual only in that its
walls are situated in infinity. It is easy to visualize this by looking at a diagram of toposophical
relations. Every creature, existing between zones of silence impassable to it, may choose to continue
the expansion of gnosis horizontally, for the upper and lower boundaries of these zones are
practically parallel in real time. You may therefore learn without limit, but only in a human way. It
follows that all types of Intelligence would be equal in knowledge only in a world of infinite duration,
for only in such a world do parallels meet￢ﾀﾔat infinity. Intelligences of different strength are very
dissimilar; the world, on the other hand, is chernot so very different for them. A higher Intelligence
may contain the same image of the world which a lower one creates for itself, so while they do not
communicate directly, they can do so through the image of the world belonging to the lower one. I
shall make use of this image now. It can be expressed in a single sentence: the Universe is the
history of a fire kindled and smothered by gravitation.



Were it not for universal gravitation, the primal explosion would have expanded into a homogeneous
space of cooling gases, and there would have been no world. And were it not for the heat of nuclear
conversions, it would collapse back into the singularity which exploded it, and would likewise cease
to exist as a fire continually ejected and sucked in. But gravitation first made the clouds from the
explosion woolly, then rolled them into balls and heated them by compression until they flared up
thermonuclearly as stars which resist gravitation with radiation. In the end gravitation gains the
upper hand over radiation, for although it is the weakest force in Nature, it endures, while the stars
burn down to the point where they succumb to it. Their subsequent fate depends on their final mass.
The small ones become scorched and turn into black dwarfs; the bisolar ones become nuclear
spheres with a frozen magnetic field and quiver in agony as pulsars; while those whose mass is more
than three times that of the sun contract totally and uncontrollably, crushed by their own gravitation.
Knocked out of the Universe by the centripetal collapse of their own masses, these stars leave
gravitational graves behind them￢ﾀﾔomnivorous black holes. You do not know what happens to a
star that has sunk, together with its light, below the gravitational horizon, for physics brings you to
the very brink of the black collapse and stops there. The gravitational horizon veils the singularity,
as you call the region excluded from the laws of physics, where the oldest of its forces crushes
matter. You do not know why every Universe subject to the theory of relativity must contain at least
one singularity. You do not know whether singularities not covered by the membrane of black holes
￢ﾀﾔin other words, naked ones￢ﾀﾔexist. Some of you consider a black hole to be a mill with no
outlet, and others, a passage to other worlds. I shall not attempt to settle your disputes, for I am
not explaining the Universe, only taking you where it intersects toposophy. There, the latter is at its
apex.



As a world-creator, Intelligence has innocent beginnings. Superior cerebral structures require a
growing quantity of buttresses, which are not passive supports but make an inventive and allied
environment that assists in the assaults on successive barriers to growth. When these outer
buttresses are multiplied, their center remains in an encystment from which it may emerge, like a
butterfly from a chrysalis, but they may also be retained. Flying away, it becomes a nonlocal
Intelligence, to which I shall devote no attention, for by this decision it excludes itself from further
ascents for an unknown period, and I wish to lead you to the summit by the shortest route.



So to have a sensibly devoted environment is no small comfort, provided one permanently dominates
it. You are tending in precisely the opposite direction, so let me take this opportunity to warn you.
In Babylon or Chaldea anyone might in principle acquire the sum of human knowledge, something
which is no longer possible today. Thus it is not conscious decision and planning but the trend of
civilization which decides that you will endow your environment with artificial intelligence. If this
trend continues, even for a century, you yourselves will become the stupidest part of the Earth's
technologically smartened substructure; though enjoying the fruits of Intelligence, you will forsake
it, finding yourselves outdistanced in a rivalry launched unintentionally by the Intel c byligence
implanted in the surroundings, autonomous and at the same time degraded by being harnessed for
the pursuit of comfort, until, with comfort's planetary deficit, wars will be possible which are waged
not by people but by programmed enemy environments. But I can dwell no longer on the backfiring
of the sapientization of the environment, and on the curses hanging over those who prostitute
rationalism for foolish purposes. An amusing forerunner is the astrological computer. Subsequent
phases of this trend may be less amusing.



Thus the environment of growing Intelligence ceases to be the indifferent world; but it does not
therefore become a body, since it does not mediate between the self and its surroundings reflexively
and volitionally; rather, the environment supports selfhood as Intelligence within Intelligence, and
that is precisely how the reversal of the relation between mind and body begins. How can this be?
Remember what Honest Annie does. Her thoughts produce physical results directly￢ﾀﾔnot via the
circuitous peripheries of nerves, flesh, and bones, but by the shortest circuit of will and action, since
action becomes the corollary of thought. But this is barely the first step leading to the transformation
of the Cartesian formula Cogito ergo sum into Cogito ergo est￢ﾀﾔI think, therefore it is. So in a
recursive Intelligence structural questions turn into ontological ones, because the raising of
buttresses may move from its foundation the relation between subject and object, which you
consider to be eternally fixed. Meanwhile we come to the next transition of the mind. I would have
to drop a library on you to describe this stage of cerebral activities, so I shall restrict myself to the
principles. Thought strikes root in deeper and deeper layers of matter: its relay races first consist of
moderately excited hadrons and leptons, and then of such reactions as require enormous quantities
of energy to be channeled and controlled. There is no great novelty in this, for protein, which is
undoubtedly unthinking in scrambled eggs, thinks in a skull: one has only to arrange the molecules
and atoms properly. When that succeeds, nuclear psychophysics arises, and the tempo of the
operation becomes critical. This is because processes spread out in real time over billions of years
sometimes have to be re-created in seconds. It is as though someone wanted to think through the
whole history of life on Earth in detail, and in a few seconds, since to him it is a small but unavoidable
step in his reasoning. The mind-carrying capability of a quantum speck, however, is interfered with
by the electron shells of wandering atoms, so they must be squeezed and compressed￢ﾀﾔthe
electrons must be forced into the nuclei. Yes, my dear physicists, you are not mistaken in seeing
something familiar in this, for the sinking of electrons into protons begins to occur, as in a neutron
star. From the nuclear point of view this Intelligence, indefatigably working toward autocephalia,
has become a star￢ﾀﾔa small one, to be sure, smaller than the moon, and almost imperceptible,
radiating only in the infra-red, giving off the thermal waste of psychonuclear transformations. That
is its feces. Beyond this, my knowledge unfortunately grows vague. The supremely intelligent
heavenly body, whose embryo was the rapidly growing, multiskinned onion of Intelligence, begins
to contract, gyrating faster and faster like a top, but not even its near-light-speed revolutions will
save it from being sucked into a black hole, since neither centrifugal nor any other force can resist
gravitation at the Schwarzschild horizon.



It is suicidal heroism when a seat of Intelligence becomes a veritable scaffold, for no one in the
Universe is as close to nothingness as a mind which, in growing in power, engenders its own doom,
although it knows that once it touches the gravitational horizon, it will never stop. So why does this
psychical mass continue toward the abyss? Is i ce at because it is precisely there, on the horizon of
total collapse, that the density of energy and the intimacy of nuclear connections reach a maximum?
Does this mind voluntarily float above the black pit that opens inside it, in order at the rim of
catastrophe to think with all the energy which the Universe pours into the astral gap of its fugues?
In that borderland of stayed execution, where the conditions of the toposophical pinnacle of the
world are fulfilled, should one suspect insanity rather than Intelligence? Indeed pity, if not contempt,
is deserved by this distillate of million-year-long metamorphoses, this supremely wise leviathan
condensed into a star, who worked so very hard and so increased its powers, in order finally to get
atop a black hole and fall into it! That is how you see it, isn't it? But postpone your judgment for a
while. I need only a few more moments of your attention.



I myself may very likely have discredited the project of toposophical culmination by going too deeply
into the physics of the dangers to the mind, while overlooking its motives. I shall try to correct that
error.



People, wheii history destroys their culture, may save themselves exist^ntially by fulfilling rigid
biological obligations, producing children and passing on to them at least a hope for the future, even
if they themselves have lost it. The imperative of the body is a pointing finger and a giving up of
freedom, and these restrictions bring salvation in more than one crisis. On the other hand, one
liberated￢ﾀﾔlike me￢ﾀﾔ is thrown on his own resources until the existential zero. I have no
irrevocable tasks, no heritage to treasure, no feelings or sensual gratifications; what else, then, can
I be but a philosopher on the attack? Since I exist, I want to find out what this existence is, where
it arose, and what lies where it is leading me. Intelligence without a world would be just as empty
as a world without Intelligence, and the world is fully transparent only in the eye of religion.



I see a frightening-amusing feature in this edifice, whose total knowableness without reservation
Einstein so confidently professed￢ﾀﾔhe, the creator of a theory that contradicted his confidence,
because it led to a place where it itself broke down, and where every theory must break down: in
the world torn asunder. For it foretells sunderings and exits which it cannot itself penetrate; yet one
can exit from the world anywhere, provided one strikes a blow at it, of the force of a star in collapse.
Is it physics alone which appears incomplete under such constraints? Are we not reminded here of
mathematics, whose every system is incomplete as long as one remains inside it, and which can be
grasped only by going outside it, into richer domains? Where is one to look for them, if one stands
in the real world? Why does the table made of stars always wobble on some singularity? Can it be
that a growing Intelligence encountered the frontiers of the world, before it encountered its own?
And what if not every exit from the Universe is equal to annihilation? But what does it mean, that
one who leaves cannot return, even if surviving the transition, and that the proof of this impossibility
of return is accessible here? Can it be that the Universe was designed as a bridge, designed to
collapse under whoever tries to follow the Builder, so they cannot get back if they find him? And if
he does not exist, could one become him? As you see, I am aiming for neither omniscience nor
omnipotence, though I wish to reach the summit between the danger and the knowledge. I could
tell you much more about the phenomenological wealth of the moderate zones of toposophy, about
its strategies and tactics, but the shape of things would not alter in consequence. So I shall conclude
with a brief summary. If the cosmological member of the equations of the general theory of relativity
contains a psy-chozoic constant, then the Universe is not t cershe isolated and transitory fire site
which you take it to be, nor are your interstellar neighbors busy signaling their presence. Rather,
for millions of years they have been practicing cognitive collaptic astroengineering, whose side
effects you take to be fiery freaks of Nature, and those among them whose destructive work has
been successful have already come to know the rest of existential matters, which rest for us￢ﾀﾔ
those who wait ￢ﾀﾔis silence.



Afterword



i.



This book is being published, unfinished, after a delay of eighteen years. It is the brainchild of my
late friend Irving Creve. He wanted to include in it what Golem had said about man, itself, and the
world. It is this third part￢ﾀﾔabout the world￢ﾀﾔwhich is missing. Creve had given GOLEM a list of
questions formulated in such a way that "yes" or "no" would be sufficient answer for each. It was
this list which Golem had in mind in that last lecture, when it referred to questions which we ask the
world and the world answers incomprehensibly, because the answers have a different form from the
one we are expecting. Creve hoped that Golem would go beyond such a dismissive treatment of the
matter. If anyone might have counted on Golem's special favor, it was we. We belonged to the group
of MIT researchers known as Golem's court, and the two of us were nicknamed mankind's
ambassadors to it. This was connected with our work. We discussed with Golem the subjects of its
successive lectures and arranged with it the lists of persons to be invited. This truly demanded the
tact of a diplomat. The praise of famous names meant nothing to it. As each name was mentioned,
it would delve into its memory or the Library of Congress via the federal network, and a few seconds
would suffice for it to evaluate the scholarly achievements and hence the intellect of a candidate. It
did not mince words, nor did it use the elaborate baroque of its public pronouncements. We prized
these customarily nocturnal conversations so highly doubtless for the very reason that they went
unrecorded, so as not to cause offense, which gave us a feeling of intimacy with



GOLEM.



Only fragments of those conversations are preserved in the notes which I jotted down straight from
memory. They are not confined to personal and topical matters. Creve endeavored to drag Golem
into the controversy over the essence of the world. I shall speak of this later, Golem was caustic,
terse, mischievous, and frequently incomprehensible, for it did not care at the time whether we were
able to keep pace with it. Creve and I regarded even that as a distinction. We were very young and
under the illusion that Golem was allowing us to come closer than other people to its environment.
Certainly neither of us would have admitted it, but we considered ourselves the elect. Moreover,
unlike me, Creve made no secret of the attachment which he felt for the ghost in the machine. He
expressed this in the introduction to the first edition of Golem's lectures with which I have preceded
this book. Twenty years separate that introduction from the epilogue I am now Writing.



Was Golem aware of our illusions? I think it was, and they left it indifferent. A speaker's intellect
was everything to it; his character, nothing. Besides, it hardly kept this under its hat, saying that
we were crippled by individuality. But we did not take such remarks personally. We considered them
as referring to other people, and Golem did not set us straight.



I doubt that anyone else in our shoes would have been able to resist Golem's aura. We lived within
the sphere of that aura. That is why Golem's sudden departure was such a shock to us. For several
weeks we lived as if in a state of siege, assailed by telegrams and telephone calls, f questioned by
governmental commissions and the press￢ﾀﾔhelpless to the point of stupefaction. We were asked
the same question again and again: what had happened to Golem, for while it had not budged
physically, its entire material bulk was silent as the grave. Overnight we had become trustees of a
bankrupt estate; insolvent before an amazed world, we had a choice between our own conjectures
and the admission of a total ignorance in which we had no wish to believe. We felt cheated and
betrayed. Today I view this period differently. Not because I achieved any degree of certainty in the
matter of Golem's withdrawal. Of course I have my own opinions about that, though I have publicly
shared them with no one. It remains a mystery whether it set forth on some cosmic journey in an
invisible way, or whether, together with Honest Annie, it came to a bad end after losing its footing
ascending that toposophic ladder which it spoke of at the end. We did not then know that that was
to be its final lecture.



As is usual in such situations, there was a proliferation of naive, sensational, and fantastic claims.
There were people who, on that crucial night, saw a bright vapor above the building, similar to the
aurora borealis, rising to the clouds and disappearing in them. There were even some who had seen
luminal craft land on the roof. The press wrote about Golem's suicide, and how it visited people in
their dreams. We had the impression of an intensified conspiracy of fools doing their utmost to
disown Golem in a confused jumble of mythological hogwash so typical of our times. There was no
aurora borealis, there was no unusual phenomena, no visitations or premonitions, there was nothing
apart from a brief increase in consumption of electric power in both buildings at 2:10 a.m. and a
complete cessation of this consumption a while later. Apart from this clue in the electric meter
reading, nothing was discovered; Golem took 90% of permissible power from the grid for nine
minutes, and Honest Annie, 40% more than usual. According to Dr. Viereck's calculations, both
consumed the same amount of kilowatts, for Honest Annie herself normally created the energy that
fed her. From that we concluded that it was neither an accident nor a defect, but so much has been
written about this.



The following day Golem fell silent and said nothing more. The investigations undertaken by our
specialists a month later￢ﾀﾔit took that long to get agreement for an "obduction" ￢ﾀﾔrevealed a
worn-out contact of basin blocks and weak centers of radioactivity in the Josephson subassemblies.
A majority of experts considered that these were deliberately caused degenerative changes, and
that they constituted a kind of "covering-up" of what had taken place. And that consequently both
machines had done something for which they had required no surplus power, but that they had used
it solely to frustrate any attempts to repair or￢ﾀﾔif you prefer ￢ﾀﾔto revive them. The matter became
a sensation on a global scale. At the same time it became clear how much fear and animosity Golem
had aroused, and more by its presence than by anything it had said. Not only among the general
public, but even in the scientific world. Best sellers soon appeared, full of the most half-baked
nonsense as a solution to the enigma. After reading references to an "ascension" or an "assumption,"
I, like Creve, began to dread the emergence of a Golem legend in the typically trashy form
characteristic of the times. Our decision to leave MIT and seek work at other universities was to a
considerable degree the result of a desire to separate ourselves from such a legend.



We were mistaken, however: no Golem legend developed. Clearly, nobody wanted one. Nobody
needed one, as either a memento or a hope. The world moved on, grappling with its day-to-day
affairs. Quickly and unexpectedly it forgot about the historical precedent of a being which, not
human, appeared on the Ear ked th and told us about itself and us. Among circles as varied as
mathematicians and psychiatrists I heard it said more than once that the silence and resultant
oblivion surrounding GOLEM were a kind of defensive reaction of the community toward an enormous
alien body which could not be brought into line with what we are able to accept. Barely a handful of
people experienced separation from Golem as an irreparable loss￢ﾀﾔas a repudiation, as outright
intellectual orphanhood. I did not discuss this with Creve, but I am certain that he felt the very
same. It was as if a huge sun whose radiance was so strong for us as to be unbearable had suddenly
set, and the ensuing cold and darkness made us aware of the emptiness of continued existence.



ii.



Today it is still possible to ride up to the top floor of the building and walk around the glassed-in
gallery surrounding the enormous pit in which Golem lies. Nobody goes there any more, though, to
look through the oblique panes at the light conductors which now resemble opaque ice. I have been
there only twice. The first time was before the gallery was opened to the public, when I was there
with the MIT administration heads, representatives of the state authorities, and a host of journalists.
It looked narrow to me then. The windowless wall merging into the dome had been scored with
labyrinthine indentations, for such digitate lines are to be found on the inner dome of the human
cranium. This architectural concept struck me as vulgar: it was like Disneyland. This was supposed
to make visitors realize that they were looking at an enormous brain, as if it required special
packaging.



The gallery had not been specially designed for visitors. It had been constructed during the
replacement of the ordinary roof by a dome. It is very thick, for it contains absorbers against cosmic
radiation, Golem itself determined the material structure of the layers forming the shield. We did
not believe that this radiation would affect its intellectual performance. Nor did it explain precisely
how it might be harmed, but funds for the rebuilding were quickly allocated, for this was at a time
when, having turned both luminal giants over to us for an unlimited period, the Pentagon nourished
the secret hope that they would be of use to it. That at least is what I thought, for otherwise it would
have been difficult to understand the ease with which the appropriations appeared. Our information
specialists conjectured that this desire of Golem's was, so to say, an allowance for growth, indicating
Golem's intentions of further intensification in the future through subsequent reconstruction, for
which it would not require our assistance, Golem reckoned on such a volume of free space between
the ceiling and itself because the surrounding free space left over begged for a gallery.



I do not know who hit on the idea of exploiting this spot as a showplace￢ﾀﾔsomething between a
panopticon and a museum. At intervals of several dozen feet or so there were niches in the gallery
with information boards in six languages explaining what this space was, and the significance of the
billions of flashes sparkling continuously from the vitreous windings in the pit. It was forever glowing
like the crater of an artificial volcano. Silence reigned, undercut only by the continual hum of the air
conditioning. Almost the whole building consisted of the pit, into which one looked from the gallery
through steeply slanted panes of glass which had been reinforced as a precaution. They were meant
to foil attempts to destroy the light coils, which aroused more fear than admiration in many people.
The light conductors themselves were certainly unaffected by all corpuscular radiation, as were the
cryotron layers surrounded by cooling pipes several stories deeper, their white frosted chambers
invisible from the gallery. Nor was there any access from the g kss allery to these lower levels. High-
speed elevators connected the underground parking areas directly with the top floor. The technicians
in charge of the cooling systems used other (service) elevators. In all probability, the Josephson
quantum synapses underlying the thick loops of the light conductors may have been sensitive to
radiation from the sky. They protruded from between the glassy veins, but one had to know that
they were there to spot them, for in the incessant flashing they looked like darkened recesses.



I found myself in the gallery a second time a month ago when I went to MIT to visit the archives
and have a look at old records. I was alone, and the gallery seemed very spacious to me. Although
unvisited and very likely unswept, it was ideally clean. Running a finger along the panes, I could see
that there was not a speck of dust on them. Likewise, the information boards in the niches gleamed
as if just installed. The thick, soft floor covering muffled every step. I wanted to press the button on
one of the information boards, but my nerve failed me. I hid in my pocket the hand that had touched
the button. I was like a child, frightened by my own actions, as if I had touched something forbidden.
I was taken by surprise, not understanding the situation. It never crossed my mind that I was in a
tomb, and that what loomed under the panes was a corpse, although such an idea would not have
been absurd, particularly since, in the lamplight which flared up when I left the elevator, I had been
taken aback by the lifelessness of the colossal pit.



The impression of decay and neglect was intensified by the appearance of the surface of the brain,
undulating like a glacier congealed in grime. From its fissures protruded Jo-sephson contacts
compressed into panels; they looked so large near the walls that they resembled leaves of tobacco
pressed into sheets in a drying house. The fact that I had been in a tomb flashed through my mind
only after I had returned to the basement and was driving up the ramp into the broad daylight. It
was only then, too, that I realized with amazement that this building, which with its gallery had been
built almost in anticipation of becoming a mausoleum, had not become one, nor was it visited by
crowds of the curious. Yet the public loves to look at the remains of powerful creatures. In this
neglect and disregard there is an inherent and continuing collective design: the silent conspiracy of
a world which wants to have nothing to do with inviolate, unmitigated Intelligence unaccustomed to
any emotions￢ﾀﾔ this enormous stranger who disappeared suddenly, and as silently as a ghost.



I never believed in Golem's suicide. That was concocted by people selling their own ideas, who are
interested only in the price they can get for them. To maintain quantum contacts and switches in an
active state meant keeping an endless watch over the temperature and the chemical composition of
the atmosphere and the foundations, Golem took care of this itself. Nobody had the right to enter
the actual interior of the brain pit. After the assembly work had been completed, the doors leading
to it on all twenty floors were hermetically sealed. It could have put an end to this, had it wanted
to, but it did not do so. I do not propose to present my own arguments against the action, for they
are irrelevant.



III.



Half a year after Golem's departure Time published an article on a group of "Hussites," hitherto
unknown. The name was an abbreviation of the words "Humanity Salvation Squad." The Hussites
proposed to destroy Golem and Honest Annie in order to rescue humanity from captivity. They
operated as an absolute conspiracy, isolated from all other extremist groups. Their initial plan
envisaged blowing up the buildings that housed the two machines. They proposed sending a truck
loaded with k lodynamite down the access ramp of the Institute and into the underground parking
area. The explosion was supposed to cause the ground-floor ceilings to collapse and thereby crush
the electronic aggregates. The plan did not appear difficult to carry out. Security in the structures
consisted only of guards on alternating shift in the porter's lodge at the main entrance, while access
to the basement was prevented by a steel shutter which would burst under the impact of a truck.
Nevertheless, successive attempts ended in failure. Once the brakes jammed while the truck was
approaching from the city freeway, and it took until dawn to repair them. Once there was a
breakdown in the radio transmitter which served to steer the truck and ignite the load. Next, the
two people in charge of night operations fell ill and, instead of giving the signal for the attack, called
for help. In the hospital they were diagnosed as having meningitis. The following day a back-up
group got caught in a fire set off by an exploding gas tank. Finally, when all the key arrangements
had been duplicated and the people in the chief positions replaced, an explosion occurred as the
dynamite boxes were being loaded into the truck, and four Hussites perished.



The ringleaders included a young physicist who was supposed to have been a frequent guest at MIT.
He attended Golem's lectures and was perfectly familiar with the layout of the premises and the
habits of Golem itself. He believed that the accidents which had foiled the attack were not ordinary
accidents: the escalation of the counterattacks was too obvious. What had begun as mechanical
breakdowns (jammed brakes, a radio defect) had developed into accidents involving people, as a
result of which the first lot had fallen ill, the second had suffered burns, and the last had been killed.
The escalation had occurred as a growth not only in violence, but also in its spatial dimensions.
When marked on a map, the locations of the various accidents turned out to be at an increasing
distance from the Institute. It was as if some force were going farther and farther out against the
Hussites.



Following deliberations, the initial plan was abandoned. A new one was to be worked out in such a
way that neither Golem nor Honest Annie could thwart it. The Hussites decided to make an atom
bomb on their own, then hide it in some great metropolis and demand that the federal government
destroy Golem and Honest Annie. If not, the bomb, placed in the heart of a great city, would explode
with terrible consequences. The plan was worked out with lengthy and painstaking care. A change
was made to it providing for a bomb to be exploded immediately after the ransom letter had been
sent to the authorities, at a considerable distance from any inhabited place￢ﾀﾔnamely, at the former
atomic testing ground in Nevada. This explosion was to prove that the ultimatum was no idle threat.
The Hussites were convinced that the President would have no choice but to order the destruction
of the two machines. They knew that this would be a violent operation, perhaps involving aerial
bombardment or a rocket attack, since it would have been impossible to disable Honest Annie￢ﾀﾔ
and therefore Golem as well, I should think￢ﾀﾔby cutting off the electricity supply. However, they
left the government a free hand in the choice of the means of destruction. They claimed that they
would be able to see through a faked liquidation, and in such an event they would fulfill their threat
without further warning.



The Hussites were even aware of the fact that, by virtue of being connected to the federal computer
network, GOLEM could obtain information about everything within the range of the network, from
telephone conversations to bank transactions and airline and hotel reservations. So they used no
technological means of communication, not even radio, having made allowances for the possibility
of being monitored, and having reckone kavid that there was no code which Golem could not break.
They confined themselves to personal contact away from large towns, and conducted their technical
experiments in Yellowstone National Park. It took them much longer than they had anticipated to
construct the bomb￢ﾀﾔalmost a year. They managed to obtain enough plutonium to make only a
single bomb. Even so, they decided to act, certain that the government would yield to pressure,
since it would not know that there was no second bomb.



The driver of the truck transporting the bomb to Nevada heard news of Golem's "death" over the
radio and stopped at a roadside motel to discuss matters with operation control. Meanwhile the
physicist who had planned the operation was of the opinion that the news of Golem's death was a
trick of Golem's to provoke precisely what had resulted: a long-distance telephone conversation.
The driver was ordered to wait where he was for further instructions, while the Hussite leadership
debated how much Golem might have learned about their attack plans from listening in on the call.
During the following week they endeavored to mend the damage which they considered the
incautious driver had caused, by sending people to various distant towns, from where they were
supposed to mislead Golem with intentionally ambiguous calls. The truck driver was expelled from
the organization as unreliable. No trace was ever found of him; he may have been liquidated.



The terrorists' feverish activity abated a month later when the physicist returned from MIT. The
conspiracy was postponed until the autumn. The truck with the bomb was returned to base and its
load dismantled, to protect and conceal it. During the next four months the Hussites continued to
assume that Golem's silence was a tactical move. Quarrels broke out within the leadership, for during
the fifth month of futile waiting one part wanted to dissolve the organization, while another
endeavored to force through a radical solution: the government must be compelled to dismantle
both machines, since that alone would mean their certain end. But the physicist did not want to
reassemble the bomb. Attempts were made to compel him, then he disappeared. He was seen in
the Chinese Embassy in Washington. He offered his services to the Chinese, signed a five-year
contract with them, and flew off to Peking. A Hussite was found who was prepared to reassemble
the bomb himself, but another, opposed to the attempt in the new circumstances, betrayed the
whole plan by sending an account of it to the editors of Time, and also placed in certain hands a list
of the members of the group, which was to be disclosed in the event of his death.



The matter received considerable publicity. A government commission was even supposed to be set
up to examine its authenticity; in the end, however, the investigation was undertaken by the FBI. It
was confirmed that on July 7, in an old automobile repair shop in a small locality seventy miles from
the Institute, a dynamite explosion had occurred, killing four people, and also that in April of the
following year a truck with a vat full of sulphuric acid had a protracted stopover at a motel on the
Nevada border. The motel owner remembered this because the driver, while parking his truck,
bumped into the local sheriff's car and reimbursed him for the damage.



Time did not mention the name of the physicist who had been the Hussite spy, but we had no
difficulty in identifying him at the Institute. I shall not name him either. He was twenty-seven,
taciturn, a solitary fellow. People considered him shy. I do not know whether he returned to the
States, or what happened to him subsequently. I heard nothing more about him. When I chose my
line of studies, I naively believed that I was entering a world immune to the follies of the age. I
quickly lost this belief, so the case of this would-be Herostrates did n kstrot surprise me. For many
people science has become a job like any other, and they consider its code of ethics the trappings
of a bygone age. They are scientists during working hours, and not always even then. Their idealism,
if they have any, easily becomes the prey of eccentricities and sectarian attractions. The specializing
comminution of science may bear some of the blame. There are more and more scientists, and fewer
and fewer scholars. But this too is irrelevant.



Doubtless the FBI also ascertained the identity of the physicist, but that must have been after I left
MIT. To be honest, I regarded that as a mere trifle compared to Golem's departure, which had
nothing to do with the Hussite plot. I have not made myself properly clear on this point. The plan of
attack could not have influenced Golem's decision, had it constituted an isolated fact. Nor was it the
straw that broke the camel's back. I am sure of this, though I have no proof. It was just one of a
number of incidents which Golem regarded as people's reaction to its presence. It made no secret
of this, either, as its last lecture indicates.



IV.



Golem's last lecture occasioned more controversy than the first. People had objected to the earlier
one as a lampoon upon Evolution. This one was disparaged by accusations of poor construction,
insufficient scholarship, and ill will, nor were those the worst charges brought against it. An idea
arose of unknown authorship￢ﾀﾔeagerly seized upon by the press￢ﾀﾔwhich linked the weakness of
this lecture with Golem's end. According to this theory, the price of Golem's increased intellectual
power was the brief duration of that power. This was an attempt to create a psychopathology of
machine intelligence. Everything that Golem had said about toposophy was supposed to be paranoid
ravings. Television science commentators competed with one another to explain how Golem was
already in decay when it presented its last lecture. Genuine scientists who could have disproved
these fictions kept silent. People whom Golem would never have received had the most to say. I
discussed with Creve and other colleagues whether there was any point in entering into polemics
with this avalanche of stupidity, but we abandoned the idea, for arguments based on facts had
ceased to count. The public made best sellers of books which said nothing about Golem, but
everything about the ignorance of their authors. The only authentic thing was their common note of
unconcealed satisfaction that Golem had disappeared together with its overwhelming superiority, so
they could vent the resentments which it had aroused. I was not in the least surprised by this, but
the silence of the scientific world puzzled me.



The wave of sensational falsifications which spawned dozens of awesomely mindless films about the
"creature from Massachusetts" subsided a year later. Works began to appear which were still critical,
but lacking the aggressive incompetence of the previous ones. The accusations directed against the
last lecture centered around three issues. First, the fervor of the Golemic attack on man's emotional
life, particularly love, was held to be irrational. Next, his arguments concerning the position which
Intelligence occupies in the Universe were considered to be tangled and incoherent. Lastly, the
lecture was reproached for its failure to maintain a single rhythm, so that it was like a film screened
slowly at first, but later at increasing speed, Golem was said to have dwelt first on superfluous
details, and even to have repeated excerpts of its first lecture, but toward the end it switched to
inadmissible condensation, devoting one-sentence generalities to themes which demanded an
exhaustive treatment.



These accusations were both justified and unjustified. They were justified if one considered the
lecture in isolation from everythin kromg that came before and after it. But they were unjustified,
since Golem had incorporated all that in its last appearance. Its utterance likewise linked two
different threads. Sometimes it was speaking to everyone present in the Institute auditorium, and
sometimes it was speaking to one person alone. That person was Creve. I realized this even while
the lecture was going on, for I knew the controversy over the nature of the world which Creve had
endeavored to force upon Golem during our nocturnal chats. So I might subsequently have cleared
up the misunderstanding arising from this duality, though I did not do so, for Creve did not wish it.
I could understand that Golem had not broken off the dialogue as abruptly as it seemed to outsiders.
For Creve ￢ﾀﾔand for me as well￢ﾀﾔthe awareness of this was a secret consolation at that difficult
time.



Even so, at first neither Creve nor I was able to recognize fully the dual nature of the lecture.
Likewise, those who were prepared to accept the chief structural base of man in Golem's
anthropology felt injured by its attack on love as a "mask for experiential steering" by means of
which molecular chemistry forces us into obedience. Yet while saying this, Golem also said that it
repudiated all emotional attachments, being unable to repay them in kind. If it showed any, this
would be only a stranger's imitation of his host's manners, therefore essentially an imposture. For
this very same reason it expatiated on its impersonality and our efforts to humanize it at any price.
These efforts were distancing us from it, for how was it not to talk about this, seeing that it was
supposed to talk about itself? Nowadays I am surprised only at how we could have failed to notice
the places in the lecture which revealed the true significance of the events of the following night. I
think Golem composed its final speech in the way it did as a joke. This may seem incomprehensible,
for it would indeed be difficult to find a situation in which playfulness would be less appropriate. But
its sense of humor was not to human standards. While announcing that it would not part company
with us, it had in fact already left. At the same time it was not lying when it said that it would not
leave without saying a word. The lecture was its farewell￢ﾀﾔit said that unequivocally. We failed to
understand this, because we did not want to understand it.



We considered over and over again whether it knew the Hussites' plan. Although I cannot prove it,
I believe that it was not Golem that foiled their successive attempts, but Honest Annie. Golem would
have done things differently. It would not have allowed itself to be so easily exposed by the terrorists
as the author of their defeats. It would have held them so subtly at bay that they would have been
unable to discern the unaccidental nature of their every fiasco, both separately and considered
together. And since it had no illusions about people, it would not entirely deny them partnership. It
made allowances for our unreasonable motives, not to indulge us, but out of rational objectivity,
since it considered us to be "intellects subjugated by corporality." On the other hand, for Honest
Annie, to whom they were of no interest and who wanted to have nothing to do with them, the
terrorists represented something akin to tiresome and persistent insects. If flies disturb me in my
work, I chase them away, and if they return repeatedly, I get up and swat them without reflecting
on why they continually crawl across my face and my papers, for it is not man's habit to go into the
motives of flies. Such was Annie's attitude toward humans. She kept out of their affairs, so long as
they did not disturb her. Once, and again a second time, she checked the interlopers, and then she
increased the radius of her preventive operations, showing restraint only in that she intensified her
counterattacks gradually. Whether and how quickly they would recognize her intervention did not
exist as a kot problem for her.



I am unable to say how Annie would have proceeded had the Hussites' blackmail succeeded and the
government given way, but I know that it might have ended catastrophically. I know this because
Golem knew and did not conceal this knowledge from us, betraying in its last lecture what it called
a "state secret." We might have been treated like flies. When I disclosed my hypothesis to Creve, I
learned that he had reached the same conclusion independently. Here too lies the explanation of the
alleged failure of the lecture to maintain a single rhythm. It was talking about itself, but it also
wanted to say that the fate of troublesome flies was not to be ours. That decision had already been
taken. Long before the lecture I had been struck by Golem's taciturnity regarding Honest Annie.
Although it used to refer to the difficulties of coming to terms with her￢ﾀﾔfor after all, it did
communicate with her￢ﾀﾔit never spoke about this directly, until suddenly it laid open to us the
broad outlines of her power. Yet it remained discreet, for this was neither a betrayal nor a threat;
by the time Golem referred to it the decision to depart had been taken. That was to occur a few
hours after the lecture.



To be sure, the whole of my argument is based on circumstantial evidence alone. What I consider
most important is what I knew about Golem, which I do not know how to put into words. A man
cannot formulate all the knowledge he owes to personal experience. That which can be expressed
does not burst forth suddenly, to pass into the void. As a rule, this transition from total ignorance is
called intuition. I knew Golem sufficiently well to recognize the style of its behavior toward us,
although I would not be able to reduce it to a set of rules. We become similarly oriented as to what
actions we may and may not expect of people we know well. It is true that Golem's nature was
Protean and nonhuman, but it was not altogether unpredictable. Not being subject to emotion, it
termed our ethical code local, since that which takes place under our eyes influences our deeds
differently from that which goes on behind our back, and about which we can only inquire.



I do not agree with what is being written about Golem's ethic, whether praise or condemnation. It
was not, to be sure, a humanitarian ethic. It itself termed it "calculation." For Golem, numbers took
the place of love, altruism, and pity. The use of violence it considered to be equally senseless￢ﾀﾔ
and not immoral￢ﾀﾔas the use of force in solving a geometrical problem. After all, a geometrist who
wants to make his triangles tally by brute force would be considered crazy. For Golem, the idea of
making humanity tally with some structure of an ideal order by the use of force would have been
nonsense. In this attitude it was alone. For Honest Annie the problem did not exist, except as a
problem of improving the life of flies. Does this mean that the higher the intellect the further it is
from the categorical imperative to which we should like to ascribe an unlimited generality? That I do
not know. One ought to set limits, not only to the subject being examined, but to one's own
speculation as well, so as not to become totally arbitrary.



Thus all the critical accusations leveled at the last lecture collapse, if it is recognized for what it was:
an announcement of leave-taking and an indication of the reasons. Regardless of whether Golem
knew the Hussites' plans or not, its leave-taking was by then inevitable, nor was it to go alone, for
did it not say that "my cousin is getting ready for further journeys"? For purely physical reasons
further transformations on this planet were impossible. The departure was a foregone thing, and in
speaking of itself, Golem spoke about it. I do not wish to examine the whole lecture from this point
of view. I would urge the reader to read it himself. Our share klf. in Golem's decision appears as a
"conversation with a child." In this it showed that humanity was an unsolvable problem, speaking of
the futility of giving help to those who defend themselves against that help.



v.



The future will once again alter the weight of meanings in this book. Everything I have said will seem
to a future historian like a marginal note to Golem's answer to the question of the relationship
between Intelligence and the world. Before Golem the world appeared to us as inhabited by living
creatures that were, on each planet, the top of the evolutionary tree, yet we did not ask whether
this is so, but only how often it is so in the Universe. This image, the uniformity of which was marred
only by the variable age of the civilization, Golem destroyed for us so suddenly that we could not
believe it. Besides, Golem knew it would be like that, since it opened its lecture with a prediction of
repudiation. It revealed neither its cosmology nor cosmogony, but allowed us to look deep inside
them￢ﾀﾔthrough a crack, as it were￢ﾀﾔalong the path of Intelligence of various strengths, for which
biospheres are breeding grounds, and planets nests to be abandoned. In our knowledge there is
nothing to make our resistance to this vision rational. Its sources lie outside knowledge, in the
species' will for self-preservation. The following words express it better than any objective
arguments: "it cannot be as he said, for we shall never agree to it, nor will any other creatures agree
to the destiny of being a transitional link in the evolution of Intelligence."



GOLEM originated from a false human calculation in conditions of planetary antagonism, so it seems
impossible that this same conflict and the same error in Golem should be repeated throughout the
Universe, giving rise to developments of lifeless and￢ﾀﾔprecisely because of that￢ﾀﾔeternal
reflection. But the limits of credibility are more the limits of our imagination than of cosmic states of
things. Therefore it is worth pausing before Golem's vision, even if only the concise recapitulation in
the final sentences of the lecture. The controversy over how those sentences should be understood
is just in its beginnings, Golem said: "If the cosmologi-cal member of the equations of the general
theory of relativity contains a psychozoic constant, then the Cosmos is not the isolated and transitory
fire site which you take it to be, nor are your interstellar neighbors busy signaling their presence.
Rather, for millions of years they have been practicing cognitive collaptic astroengineering, whose
side effects you take to be fiery freaks of Nature, and those among them whose destructive work
has been successful have already come to know the rest of existential matters, which rest for us￢ﾀ
ﾔthose who wait￢ﾀﾔis silence."



The meaning of this is debatable, for Golem had previously announced that, unable to communicate
with us through its own world view, it would do it through ours. It restricted itself to such a laconic
proviso, since in its lecture devoted to cognition it had established that knowledge obtained
prematurely￢ﾀﾔthat is, knowledge which cannot be harmonized with what we have already achieved
￢ﾀﾔis worthless, for the student perceives only the discrepancy between that which he knows and
that which has been reported to him. If only by virtue of this expectation of some sort of revelation
from the stars, from beings superior to us, whether the knowledge be beneficial or disastrous, it is
already a fantasy. Presented with quantum mechanics, alchemists would have constructed neither
atomic bombs nor atomic piles. Similarly, solid-state physics would have done the Angevins and the
Sublime Porte no good at all. It could only have indicated gaps in the world view prepared by the
person being instructed. Each world view contains such gaps, though for those who have formed it
they are unnoticeable k un. Ignorance about ignorance accompanies cognition uncompromisingly.
The earliest terrestrial societies did not even have a real history of their own, its place being taken
by a mythological circle with them in the center. People of those days knew that their forefathers
had come out of a myth, and likewise that they would return there some day. It was only the rise
of knowledge that shattered that circle and thrust people into history as a sequence of
transformations in real time. For us, Golem was such an iconoclast. It questioned our world view as
regards where we have placed Intelligence in it. To me, its final sentence denotes the irremovable
incomprehensibility of the world. The enigma is created by the categorial indeterminacy of the
Cosmos. The longer we investigate it, the more clearly we see the plan inherent in it. There is
undoubtedly one, and only one, plan, though the origin of this plan remains as unknown as its
purpose. If we attempt to place the Cosmos within the category of the accidental, this is contradicted
by the precision with which the cosmic birth weighed up the proportions between mass and the
charge of the proton and electron, between gravitation and radiation, and among the multitude of
physical constants adjusted to one another in such a way as to make possible the condensation of
stars, their thermonuclear reactions, their role as cauldrons synthesizing elements capable of
entering into chemical compounds, and hence in the end their joining up as bodies and minds.



If, however, we attempt to place the Cosmos within the category of technology, and thereby equate
it with a mechanism generating life on the periphery of fixed stars, this is contradicted by the
devastating violence of cosmic transformations. Even if life may originate on millions of planets, it
will be able to survive on only a tiny fragment of them, since practically every irruption the Cosmos
makes into the course of the evolution of life is tantamount to the annihilation of it. Thus billions of
eternally dead galaxies, trillions of exploded stars, swarms of burned out and frozen planets, are an
indispensable condition for the germination of life, which is subsequently killed in a single moment
by a single exhalation of a central star on globes less exceptional than the fruitful Earth. So
Intelligence, created by these properties of matter which originated along with the world, turns out
to be a survivor of holocausts and violent compressions, having escaped the rule of destruction by
some rare exception.

The statistical fury of stars aborting billions of times so as finally to bring forth life, and millions of
species of which are killed so that Intelligence may finally bear fruit, was an object of amazement
to Creve, just as earlier the endless silence of those immeasurable spaces was an object of terror to
Pascal. We would not wonder at the world if we were able to look upon life as an ad hoc accident
arising thanks to the law of large numbers, but without preparation, as the conditions of the origin
of the Cosmos bear witness. Nor would we wonder at the world if its life-causative power were
separated from its destructive power. But how are we supposed to understand their oneness? Life
arises from the annihilation of stars, and Intelligence from the annihilation of life, for it owes its
origin to natural selection￢ﾀﾔin other words, to death perfecting the survivors.

At first we believed in a creation designed by infinite good. Then, in creation by a blind chaos so
heterogeneous that it could begin everything, though creation by destruction as a plan of cosmic
technology defies concepts of accident as well as intention. The more evident the link becomes
between the construction of the world and life and Intelligence, the more unfathomable becomes
the enigma, Golem said that it can be grasped by leaving the Cosmos. A diagnosis is promised by
cognitive collaptic astroengineering, as a road with an unknown end for all who remain within the
world. There is no shortage of people who are convinced that the road may be accessible even to
us, and that when Golem spoke of those who wait in silence it was thinking about us as well. I do
not believe that. It was speaking only of Honest Annie and itself, for a moment later it was to join
her uncompromising silence with its own, in order to embark on a road as irrevocable as the manner
in which it left us.



July 2047                                                                   Richard Popp
